<div class="partition" id="part1">

<h2>Part I. <br/> The Crimes</h2>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch01">

<h2>Chapter I. <br/> The Street</h2>

<p>Praed Street is not at any time one of London’s brighter
thoroughfares. Certainly it ends upon a note of hope,
terminating as it does on the fringe of the unquestioned
respectability of Bayswater, but for the rest of its course
it is frankly lamentable. Narrow, bordered by small and
often furtive shops, above which the squalid looking
upper parts are particularly uninviting, it can never have
been designed as more than a humble annexe of its more
prosperous parent, the Edgware Road. And then, for no
apparent reason, the Great Western Railway planted its
terminus upon it, and Praed Street found itself called
upon to become a main artery of traffic.</p>

<p>It seems to have done very little to adapt itself to
its new rôle. Beyond an occasional grudging widening,
it has left the unending streams of buses, of heavy railway
lorries, of hurrying foot passengers, to shift for themselves
as best they can. It almost seems as though Praed Street
regarded Paddington Station as an intrusion, and those
who throng to and from it as unwelcome strangers. It had
its own interests long before the railway came—one of
the termini of the Grand Junction Canal lies within a
few yards of its sombre limits. Praed Street watches with
indifference the thronging crowds which pass along, and
they in turn take little heed of the uninviting
thoroughfare through which their journey leads them.</p>

<p>Not that these philosophic reflections occupied the
mind of Mr. James Tovey, which was far too full of an
acute sense of annoyance and discomfort to find room for
any other sensations. Mr. Tovey was not an inhabitant of
Praed Street, although he lived in its neighbourhood.
There was nothing secretive about Mr. Tovey, you could
see his name and occupation painted in bold letters over
a shop in Lisson Grove; James Tovey, Fruit and
Vegetable Merchant. He was, in fact, a greengrocer, and, years
ago, when Mr. Tovey had originally employed a small
legacy in the purchase of the business, the sign had read:
Tovey, Greengrocer, etc. But it was Mr. Tovey’s proud
boast that he always moved with the times, and since his
neighbours, the butcher and the grocer, had respectively
converted themselves into Meat Purveyors and Provision
Dealers, he had abandoned the vulgar term of greengrocer
for the more high-sounding appellation.</p>

<p>Sunday was a day of strict observance with Mr. Tovey,
its presiding deity his own comfort. One can hardly blame
him for this indulgence, since the rest of the week left
him little leisure for repose. His habit was to rise before
six, in order to drive the van to Covent Garden. The van,
a second-hand Ford, was the subject of the ribald mirth
of his acquaintances. Every non-essential part had long
since fallen off, as an aged elm sheds its branches, and the
essentials were held together by odd pieces of rope. But
to any suggestion of the van’s imperfections, Mr. Tovey
merely shrugged his shoulders. “ ’Tisn’t ’er looks as
matters,” he would reply. “So long as she does ’er job she’ll
do for me.” And perhaps this phrase, applied to things at
large, was a complete summing up of Mr. Tovey’s
philosophy.</p>

<p>He opened the shop as soon as he returned from
Covent Garden, and kept it open, winter and summer, till
a late hour. Lisson Grove shops late, and it was usually
ten o’clock before Mr. Tovey could reckon to get his bit
of supper. It was therefore natural that so strenuous a
week should be rewarded by a relaxation on Sunday. It
was his invariable habit to stay in bed till noon, inhaling
the savoury smell of the Sunday joint roasting in the
kitchen, and only to rise and put on his best suit when
the clock struck that hour. The afternoon was usually
devoted to the peaceful somnolence of repletion, or
sometimes in summer, if Mrs. Tovey’s legs felt equal to
accompanying him, to a walk in the park. And in the
evening there were always the thrilling columns of the
Sunday paper.</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey hated to be disturbed in the evening of this
day of rest. Especially on such an evening as the present.
The day had been an eminently satisfactory one, from
his point of view. The sirloin of beef, carefully selected
by Mrs. Tovey from the stock of her friend the Meat
Purveyor, over the way, had been of uncommon
succulence; the Yorkshire pudding crisped to that exact
degree of golden delicacy that Mr. Tovey’s heart desired.
True, he had had a slight difference of opinion with Mrs.
Tovey, but that had merely given a zest to a day which
might otherwise have been uneventful. Mr. and Mrs.
Tovey never really quarrelled. For one thing they were
neither of them of a quarrelsome disposition, and for
another they were both too fond of their own comfort
to risk its disturbance by domestic rancour. But
sometimes they did not see eye to eye, as in the present case.</p>

<p>It had begun when Mr. Tovey had come down to the
kitchen, and noticed that only two places had been laid
at the table. He had raised his eyebrows and glanced
towards the massive form of Mrs. Tovey, bending over the
glowing range.</p>

<p>“Hullo! Where’s Ivy, then?” he asked, in an almost
querulous tone.</p>

<p>“Gone out with Ted,” replied Mrs. Tovey quietly, from
among the saucepans. “He’s taken her home to dinner,
and they’re going on to the pictures afterwards.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey clicked his tongue, his favourite expression
of annoyance. Of course, Ted and Ivy had known one
another since they were children. Old Sam Copperdock,
Ted’s father, was Mr. Tovey’s oldest friend, and they had
been near neighbours ever since the latter, as a newly
married man, had bought the greengrocery business.
Still, Mr. Tovey didn’t altogether like it. Ivy was twenty
now, and young Ted Copperdock only three years older.
Just the sort of age when young folks get the bit between
their teeth and go and get married without a thought of
the future. Old Sam was a thorough good chap, and his
son was a very nice lad; Mr. Tovey would not have denied
either of these facts for a moment. But Ted’s only
prospects lay in his father’s shop in Praed Street, and Mr.
Tovey had very different views of his only child’s future,
very different.</p>

<p>Yet he had never put these views into words. Perhaps
he would have found it very difficult to do so, for Mr.
Tovey’s vocabulary was strictly limited. But they were
there, just the same—had been ever since Ivy’s prowess at
school had discovered her to be a “scholar.” From that
moment Mr. Tovey had been at great pains to educate
his daughter to an entirely different state of life from
that which it had pleased God to call her. That she was
by now tall, distinctly pretty, and extraordinarily
self-possessed was not, one supposes, due to the efforts of
Mr. Tovey. But she certainly owed the fact that she was
an extremely competent shorthand typist to the pains he
had devoted to her education.</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey, though naturally he would have been justifiably
annoyed at such a suggestion, had an incurably
romantic core to his plodding and material mind. Of
course, in common with most of his class, he firmly
believed that human happiness varied exactly with the social
scale. “As happy as a king” was to him no mere catchword.
He was convinced—and, to do him justice, he drew
considerable satisfaction from the conviction—that the
members of the Royal Family were the happiest
persons in the land, and that this happiness descended
in regular gradation through the ranks of the nobility
and gentlefolk until it reached acute misery somewhere
in the lower strata of those who dwelt in slums. From this
outlook on life it necessarily followed that the more he
could enable Ivy to better herself, the happier she must
ultimately be.</p>

<p>How this betterment was to take place, Mr. Tovey
never explained. But sometimes he had a vague intangible
dream of Ivy, his Ivy, captivating the heart of some
susceptible employer, preferably of the Upper Classes. His
eye, diverted for the moment from the business of
wrapping up a parcel of leeks, often caught sight of the
Pictures in the newspaper which he was using for the
purpose. “Lady Mary Mayfair (right) and the Countess
of Piccadilly (left) on the lawn at Ascot.” Suppose that
one day he should proudly open the paper to find Ivy
with a smile like that, gracefully posing under the heading
“A leader of Society in the paddock at Goodwood”? After
all, why not?</p>

<p>But it was not until after the second helping of roast
beef and Yorkshire that he made any further remark about
his daughter to Mrs. Tovey. “I wouldn’t encourage young
Ted to hang around Ivy too much, if I was you,” he said,
as he pushed aside his plate.</p>

<p>“Encourage? He don’t want no encouraging,” replied
Mrs. Tovey briskly. “He just comes in, cheerful like,
nods to me, asks after you, says a word or two to Ivy,
and away they goes together. Things ain’t the same now
as they was when we was their age, Jim.”</p>

<p>“No, it’s a fact they ain’t,” agreed Mr. Tovey
darkly.</p>

<p>“But let ’em alone,” continued Mrs. Tovey. “Ivy’s not
the girl to make a fool of herself, you ought to know that
by this time. Now you can go and sit in your chair by the
fire. It’s not the sort of day for the likes of us to be
going out.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey shook his head, as though unconvinced by
his wife’s words, and looked out of the window. Much as
he might disagree with her on the subject of their
daughter, there was no doubt that she was right about the
weather. It was the beginning of November, and the
month was doing its best to live up to its reputation. A
thin mist, precursor of the fog that must surely follow,
filled the narrow streets, and through it filtered a cold raw
drizzle, through which a few passing pedestrians hurried,
muffled up to their ears.</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey grunted, and drew his chair up closer
towards the fire. The weather could do what it liked, as long
as it cleared up before the next morning. He certainly
was not going out into it. He composed himself for his
afternoon nap, from which he arose refreshed and eager for
the lurid pages of his favourite Sunday paper. He studied
this intently for some minutes, then turned animatedly to
Mrs. Tovey.</p>

<p>“That brute what cut up the young woman he was
walking out with is committed for trial at the Old Bailey,”
he said.</p>

<p>“I reckoned he would be, the dirty brute,” replied Mrs.
Tovey, who was almost as keen a criminologist as her
husband. “And I’d see he didn’t get off, neither, if I was
on the jury.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey turned and looked at her gravely. “ ’Tis all
very well for you to talk like that,” he said reprovingly.
“It’s a terrible thing to be on a jury when a man’s life
depends on what you says. Nobody knows that better than
I do, I’m sure.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I remember the state you was in that time,”
replied Mrs. Tovey. “Dear, dear, best part of a week you
was at it, and Ivy just born and all. What was the chap’s
name? I remember he was a doctor who’d killed one of
his patients by giving him a dose of something.”</p>

<p>“Morlandson, Dr. Morlandson,” said Mr. Tovey.
“Lord, whenever I eats anything as disagrees with me I
dreams of his face a-looking at us from the dock. Fair
gave me the creeps, it did, for a long time after. We found
him guilty, and I couldn’t help looking at him when the
judge put on his black cap and sentenced him. Ugh!”</p>

<p>“But they didn’t ’ang ’im after all,” remarked Mrs.
Tovey.</p>

<p>“No, he was reprieved, I don’t rightly know why.
Because he’d been a big pot in his way, I suppose. Twenty
years hard he got, though, and serve ’im right. This bloke
I’m telling you about won’t get off so easy, though.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey returned to the perusal of his paper, and the
evening wore on, the silence of the cosy kitchen broken
only at intervals by the voice of Mr. Tovey, reading in a
halting voice some more than usually spicy extract to
his wife. Tea-time came and went, and still Ivy made no
appearance. It was nearly nine o’clock when Mr. Tovey
referred to her absence. “I can’t think where that girl’s
got to,” he said irritably. “She’s no call to be out all this
time.”</p>

<p>“Ted’ll have taken her home to have a bite of supper,”
returned Mrs. Tovey equably. “His father likes to have
her round there, cheers him up, she does. She’ll be back
before long, never you worry.”</p>

<p>The reply which sprang to Mr. Tovey’s lips was checked
by the urgent ringing of the telephone bell in the shop,
separated from the kitchen by a door kept locked on
Sundays.</p>

<p>“Hullo! What’s that?” he enquired in a startled tone.
Mrs. Tovey had already moved towards the door. “I’ll go
and see,” she replied shortly. Her husband, listening
intently, could hear her steps on the bare boards, the sudden
cessation of the ringing as she took up the receiver, her
voice as she answered, then a pause.</p>

<p>Then he heard her call him from the other room.
“Somebody wants to speak to you, Jim.”</p>

<p>With a muttered objurgation he dragged himself from
his chair and went into the shop. His wife handed him
the instrument. “Hullo!” he said and for a moment stood
listening.</p>

<p>“Yes, I’m James Tovey.” A long pause, while Mrs.
Tovey vainly tried to make sense of the faint sounds which
reached her ears. “What’s that? Oh! a man, you say,
thank the Lord for that! I thought for the moment it
might be my daughter, she’s out a bit late to-night. Yes!
I’ll be along at once.”</p>

<p>He put back the receiver and turned to his wife. “That’s
a rum show!” he exclaimed, not without a tremor of
excitement in his voice. “St. Martha’s Hospital, that was.
There’s a fellow been run over, and they can’t find out
who he is. The only thing in his pocket is a bit of
paper with my name an’ address on. Now, who the dickens
can it be?”</p>

<p>“Why, young Alf, as likely as not,” replied Mrs.
Tovey unemotionally. “Why ’e ’asn’t been run over afore,
goin’ about as he does with his ’ead in the air, is more
than I can make out.”</p>

<p>Alf was the youth employed by Mr. Tovey to deliver
the purchases of such of his customers as did not prefer
to carry them home wrapped up in newspaper. But Mr.
Tovey shook his head at the suggestion.</p>

<p>“Not it! Young Alf lives down Camberwell way, and
he’s not likely to be up this way of a Sunday. Give us
my coat, missus, and I’ll go along and see who it is.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey struggled into his coat, and turned the
collar well up over his ears. It was a most unpleasant
evening to be out in, but, after all, it was worth it. His mind
had been steeped in sensation all the afternoon, and now
he was himself about to take a leading part in some
thrilling tragedy. In imagination he could see the account in
the next issue of the <i>Paddington Clarion and Marylebone
Recorder</i>. Headlines first: “Fatal Accident. Man crushed
to death by Motor Bus.” Then his own name: “The body
was identified by Mr. Tovey, the well-known Fruit and
Vegetable Merchant of Lisson Grove.” This was fame
indeed!</p>

<p>He stood at the corner of Lisson Grove for a moment,
eyeing the buses as they passed him. Through their
streaming window panes he could see that they were all full,
a row of dejected looking passengers standing in each one
of them. There was nothing for it, he would have to walk.
It wasn’t very far, anyhow, not more than half a mile at
most.</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey stepped out smartly along Chapel Street,
across the Edgware Road, and entered Praed Street.
Despite the depressing weather, the pavements seemed to be
full of people, groups of whom overflowed into the roadway,
only to be driven back helterskelter by the menacing
onrush of the motor-buses. Mr. Tovey picked his way
through the crowd with the consciousness of the importance
of his mission. So intent was he upon reaching his
goal, and, having played his part, upon regaining the
comfort of his own fireside, that he scarcely spared a glance
for the lighted window above Sam Copperdock’s shop.
Ivy was behind that drawn curtain, no doubt. He might
drop in and pick her up on his way home. He certainly
could not stop now.</p>

<p>With a due sense of dignity he climbed the steps of
the main entrance of St. Martha’s, and nodded familiarly
to the porter in the hall. “My name’s Tovey,” he said,
“you rang me up just now to come and identify an
accident case.”</p>

<p>The porter looked at him incredulously. “Rang you up?
’Oo rang you up? First I’ve ’eard of it.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey clicked his tongue impatiently. “Why, not
more than a quarter of an hour ago,” he replied. “Man
been run over, and you couldn’t find out who he was.”</p>

<p>“We ain’t ’ad no accidents brought in the ’ole blessed
day,” returned the porter stolidly. “You’ve made a
bloomer, you ’ave. Wait ’ere a moment while I goes and
sees if anybody knows anything about it. Tobey, did you
say your name was?”</p>

<p>“Tovey!” replied that individual angrily. The porter
turned his back upon him and disappeared, his boots
clattering noisily upon the tiled floor. Mr. Tovey, with a
sudden reaction from his excited imaginings, stood cold
and miserable in the centre of a puddle formed by the
drops from his overcoat.</p>

<p>After what seemed an interminable time the porter
returned. “Somebody’s bin pulling your leg,” he said, with a
malicious grin. “We ain’t ’ad no accidents, and nobody
’ere ain’t ever ’eard of you. Didn’t get the name of the
’orspital wrong, did you? Wasn’t St. George’s, was it, or
maybe St. Thomas’s?”</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey shook his head. “No, it was St. Martha’s,
right enough,” he replied. A sudden wave of anger at the
hoax which had been played upon him surged through his
brain, and without another word he turned and strode out
of the hall. It was monstrous that he, a citizen and a
rate-payer, should be dragged out into the streets on a fool’s
errand like this. With his grievance rankling to the
exclusion of every other thought, he pushed his way along
Praed Street, his head down, his hands crammed into his
overcoat pockets. The drizzle had turned to sleet, and the
sting of it on his face added to his ill-humour.</p>

<p>Ahead of him was the Express Train, a public-house
which had presumably been built and named at the time
of the coming of the railway. It was closing time by now,
and a stream of gesticulating figures was being disgorged
upon the crowded pavement. Mr. Tovey looked up as he
heard the turmoil. The cold air and comparative darkness,
after the warmth and light of the bar, seemed to have
had an unsteadying effect upon the ejected guests. They
lurched about the pavement singing snatches of ribald
songs, arguing heatedly in loud voices.</p>

<p>Mr. Tovey frowned. Nice way to spend a Sunday
evening! Thank God, he didn’t live in Praed Street,
anyhow. He wasn’t going to be barged off the pavement by a
lot of drunken hooligans, not he. Putting his head a trifle
further down, like a bull about to charge, he strode straight
ahead in an undeviating line. One man lurched into him,
another jostled him from behind, and a menacing voice,
its effect somewhat marred by a loud hiccough, called out,
“ ’ere, ’oo the ’ell d’yer think you’re pushin’?”</p>

<p>And then Mr. Tovey, with a queer strangled cry,
suddenly collapsed in a heap upon the muddy pavement.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch02">

<h2>Chapter II. <br/> The Herbalist</h2>

<p>It is the proud boast of our modern educationalists that
the process of forcing knowledge down unwilling throats,
known as compulsory education, has resulted in the
triumph of science over superstition. Alchemy and astrology,
the magic of the Middle Ages, have given place to
chemistry and astronomy, the mysteries of which are
displayed before the wondering eyes of the elementary
scholar. The Age of Superstition is commonly supposed to
have fled before the progress of the Age of Materialism.</p>

<p>This supposition is demonstrably false. At no other
age in the earth’s history has superstition owned so many
votaries. From the most rapt spiritualist to the man who
refuses to walk under a ladder, the world is full of people
who allow superstition to play an important part in their
lives. In the neighbourhood of Praed Street fortune tellers
and interpreters of dreams are superstition’s most popular
ministers, though it may come as a surprise to many that
a brass plate nailed to the door of a house in the Harrow
Road advertises the existence of the British College of
Astrology.</p>

<p>Even Alchemy is not without its devotees, although the
alchemist has forsaken the more picturesque apparatus
of his stock-in-trade. He now owns a small shop, the
darker the better, and fills the windows with a curious
assortment of dried herbs, each with a notice affixed to
it describing its virtues. You may go in and buy two
pennyworth of some dried plant with a high-sounding
Latin name, the herbalist assuring you that, mixed with
boiling water and drunk as tea, it will cure the most
obscure disease. If you have sufficient faith, it probably will.</p>

<p>But this is the least of the herbalist’s abilities. It is, in
fact, merely the outward sign of an inward and spiritual
wisdom. You can consult him, in the little back parlour
behind the shop, upon all manner of subjects which you do
not care to mention to your friends. And, for a consideration,
he will give you advice which you may or may not
follow. At all events, if the herbalist knows his business,
he will contrive to command respect, and, at the same
time, earn a surprising number of shillings.</p>

<p>The establishment of Mr. Elmer Ludgrove, the herbalist
of Praed Street, was almost exactly opposite that of Mr.
Samuel Copperdock, who dealt in another herb, namely
tobacco. There was a considerable contrast between the
two shops; that of Mr. Copperdock was always newly
painted, and its windows full of tins and boxes bearing
the brightest labels known to the trade. The herbalist’s
window, on the other hand, was low and frowning, backed
by a matchboard partition which effectually precluded
any view into the shop. Between the partition and the
glass were displayed the usual bunches of dried plants
and dishes containing seeds and shrivelled flowers. The
door of the shop closed with a spring, and if you had the
curiosity to push this open you found yourself in a dark
little room, across the centre of which ran a narrow
counter. The noise of your entry would bring Mr. Ludgrove
through a second door, shrouded by a heavy curtain,
and he would ask you politely what he could do for you.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove’s appearance was certainly in keeping
with his calling. He was tall and thin, with a pronounced
stoop and a deep but not unpleasant voice. But it was his
head that you looked at instinctively. Above the massive
forehead and powerfully-chiselled features was a wealth
of long, snow-white hair, balanced by a flowing beard of
the same colour. His eyes, behind his iron-rimmed
spectacles, looked at you benignly, but they conveyed the
impression that they saw further into your mind than the
eyes of the mere casual stranger. If you were a mere
customer for some simple remedy, you came away with the
pleasant feeling of having been treated with unusual
courtesy. If your business was such that Mr. Ludgrove
invited you to discuss it with him in the room behind the
curtain, you very soon found out that behind Mr. Ludgrove’s
impressive presence there lay a wealth of wisdom
and experience.</p>

<p>Praed Street, which beneath its squalor possesses a
vein of native shrewdness, had very soon estimated Mr.
Ludgrove’s worth. That neighbourhood had very few
secrets, romantic or sordid, which, sooner or later, were
not told in halting whispers behind the sound-defying
curtain. And, whatever the secret might be, the teller of
it never became swallowed up again in the stream of
humanity which flowed past Mr. Ludgrove’s door without
some grain of comfort, material or moral, which as often
as not had cost the recipient nothing.</p>

<p>Mr. Samuel Copperdock had from the first taken a
great fancy to old Ludgrove, as he called him. When the
name had first appeared over the shop, which had stood
empty for years, almost opposite his own premises, he had
been intrigued at once. Curiosity—or perhaps it was not
mere vulgar curiosity, but a thirst for information—was
one of Sam Copperdock’s chief characteristics. He must
have been one of Mr. Ludgrove’s first customers, if not
the very first, for on the very day the herbalist’s shop was
opened he had walked across the road, pushed open the
door, and thumped upon the counter.</p>

<p>He stared quite frankly at Mr. Ludgrove as the latter
came into the shop, and opened the conversation without
delay. “Look here, you sell medicines, don’t you?” he
inquired briskly.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled, and with a slight gesture seemed
to indicate the long rows of drawers behind the counter.
“Yes, if you like to call them such,” he replied gently.
“What particular medicine do you require?”</p>

<p>“Well, I’m terrible troubled with rheumatics,” said
Mr. Copperdock. “Mind, I don’t hold with any of them
quack mixtures, but I thought I’d just step across and
see if you had anything that was any good.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. Certainly Mr. Copperdock, short,
red-faced, and inclined to stoutness, looked the picture of
health. “Rheumatism, eh?” he remarked. “How long have
you suffered from it?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock laughed. There was something disarming
in the attitude of this herbalist fellow. Besides,
deception in any form was not Mr. Copperdock’s strong
suit.</p>

<p>“Well, to tell the truth, I don’t worry much about them
rheumatics,” he replied. “I came across neighbour-like,
mainly to see what sort of a place you’ve got here.”</p>

<p>“I’m sure you’re very welcome,” replied Mr. Ludgrove
courteously. The two men leant on the opposite
sides of the counter, chatting for a while. At last Mr.
Copperdock straightened himself up, half reluctantly.
“Well, I must get back to business, I suppose,” he said.</p>

<p>“Look here, how serious were you about that
rheumatism?” interposed Mr. Ludgrove. “Do you ever feel any
twinges of it?”</p>

<p>“Oh, sometimes,” replied Mr. Copperdock nonchalantly.
“Can’t say as it worries me much, though.”</p>

<p>“If you take my advice, you’ll stop it before it gets
worse,” said Mr. Ludgrove, opening a drawer and taking
from it a scoopful of some parched-looking seeds. “If
you put a teaspoonful of these into half a tumbler of
boiling water, and drink the liquid twice a day after meals,
you won’t have any further trouble.”</p>

<p>He had poured the seeds into a paper bag as he spoke,
and handed them across to Mr. Copperdock.</p>

<p>“How much?” asked the latter rather awkwardly,
putting his hand in his trouser pocket.</p>

<p>But Mr. Ludgrove waved him away. “Try them first,
my dear sir,” he said. “Then, if you find they do you
good and you want some more, we’ll talk about payment.”</p>

<p>That first introduction had, in the course of years,
ripened into friendship. Nearly every morning Mr.
Copperdock was in the habit of stepping across the road and
having a chat with old Ludgrove. Mr. Copperdock loved
somebody to talk to. If you went into his shop to buy a
packet of your favourite cigarettes you were lucky if you
got out after less than five minutes conversation. In the
evening, after the shop was closed, a select company in the
saloon bar of the Cambridge Arms gave Mr. Copperdock
the opportunities he sought. Mr. Copperdock, who had
been a widower for many years, always talked of retiring
in favour of his only child Edward.</p>

<p>“Does the lad good to be left in charge of the shop
for a bit,” was his father’s justification for his morning
talk with his friend the herbalist. And Mr. Ludgrove,
whose trade was never very brisk in the mornings, always
seemed glad to see him.</p>

<p>Thus, on the Monday following Mr. Tovey’s adventure
it was to Mr. Ludgrove that Sam Copperdock hastened
to unbosom himself. He was simply bursting with news,
and he watched impatiently until the unlocking of Mr.
Ludgrove’s shop door indicated that that gentleman was
ready to receive visitors. Then he bustled across the road
and into the shop. “Are you there, Ludgrove?” he called
out.</p>

<p>“Come in, come in, Mr. Copperdock,” replied a
welcoming voice from behind the curtain, and the
tobacconist, with an air of supreme importance, passed into the
inner room.</p>

<p>The room was half-parlour, half-laboratory. One side
of it was entirely occupied by a long bench, upon which
stood a variety of scientific instruments. At the other
side, placed round a cheerful fire, were two comfortable
arm-chairs, in one of which sat the herbalist himself.
With a hospitable gesture he motioned Mr. Copperdock
towards the other, but the tobacconist was too excited to
perceive the invitation.</p>

<p>“I say, have you heard the news about poor Jim
Tovey?” he exclaimed, without preliminary.</p>

<p>“My dear sir, I read my paper pretty thoroughly every
morning, as you know,” replied Mr. Ludgrove with a
glance at the sheet which lay on the table by his side.</p>

<p>But Sam Copperdock merely snorted impatiently.
“Newspaper!” he exclaimed, “why, the newspapers don’t
know nothing about it! I tell you I’ve been up three parts
of the night over this affair.”</p>

<p>“Indeed? Then you probably know all the details,”
replied the herbalist. “If you can spare the time, I should
be very interested if you would sit down and tell me
all about it.”</p>

<p>This was exactly what Mr. Copperdock had meant
to do. He sank heavily into the chair with a portentous
sigh. “Terrible thing, terrible,” he began, shaking his head.
“I’ve known Jim Tovey ever since he first took that shop
in Lisson Grove, and to think that a thing like this should
happen to him! And his poor daughter Ivy spent the
best part of the evening at my place, too.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove, who knew his friend’s methods of
expression, was careful not to interrupt, and after a short
pause the tobacconist resumed his relation.</p>

<p>“First I knew of it was from my boy Ted. You see, it
was like this. Ted’s very sweet on Ivy, and a nice girl
she is, too. None of your fly-away misses, but a nice steady
girl what’ll make her way in the world. Ted brought her
to my place for dinner, then they spends the afternoon
at the pictures, and comes back for supper. About
half-past nine or maybe quarter to ten Ivy says it’s time she
was getting home, and she and Ted goes out together.
I was thinking Ted was a long time a-seeing of her home,
since it was a shocking night, and they weren’t likely to
dawdle on the way, when in he comes white as a sheet,
and all of a tremble. ‘Dad,’ he says, ‘Ivy’s father’s been
murdered.’</p>

<p>“Well, I thought the boy had gone off his head.
‘Murdered?’ I says. ‘Why, what do you mean? Who’d want to
murder Jim Tovey, I’d like to know?’ Then after a bit
I manages to get the whole story out of him. It seems that
when he and Ivy got to Lisson Grove, Jim Tovey was out.
He’d been called to St. Martha’s to identify an accident
case. He stayed there for a bit, when suddenly the door
bell rings. Mrs. Tovey answers it, and in comes a
policeman, with a message that Mrs. Tovey and Ivy were
wanted at St. Martha’s at once. Mrs. Tovey goes upstairs
to put her things on, and Ivy goes with her. Then the
policeman asks Ted if he’s a friend of the family, and
when he says he is, tells him that poor Jim has just been
murdered in this very street, not a couple of hundred
yards from where we’re sitting now.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded. “A most extraordinary affair
altogether,” he commented.</p>

<p>“Ah, you may well call it extraordinary,” agreed Mr.
Copperdock significantly, “there’s more in it than meets
the eye, that’s what I says. Well, as soon as I hears this
I thinks of those two poor women, and off I goes to St.
Martha’s to see if I could be of any use. There I finds a
police inspector who asks me who I was. When he hears
I was Jim Tovey’s oldest friend he tells me all about it.
It seems that a policeman who had his eye on the lads
coming out of the Express Train—they’re a rough crowd,
as you know—saw a man fall down and then heard a lot
of hollering. Thinking there was a scrap he went over
and found Jim Tovey on the ground with a lot of fellows
standing round him. It didn’t take him long to find out
that Jim was dead, but nobody seemed to know how it
happened. There was a crowd on the pavement outside the
pub, and it was a foggy sort of night that you couldn’t
see very clearly in.”</p>

<p>“I know,” put in Mr. Ludgrove. “I was out about that
time myself. I always go for a walk after supper, rain
or fine; it’s the only chance of exercise I get.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know you do,” agreed Mr. Copperdock. “I often
wonder you don’t catch your death of cold. Well, the
policeman calls up the ambulance, and they gets poor Jim
round to St. Martha’s. There they very soon finds out
what’s the matter. There’s a great long knife, in shape
rather like a butcher’s skewer, but without a handle,
sticking into him. And the point’s right through his heart.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock paused dramatically. There was no
doubt that he was thoroughly enjoying himself, and Mr.
Ludgrove was far too good a listener to interrupt him.</p>

<p>“I took Mrs. Tovey and Ivy home,” he continued,
“and the Inspector told me he’d come and have a chat
with me later. It was past midnight when he turned up,
and then of course he wanted to know all about poor
Jim, and whether I knew of anybody who had a grudge
against him. He couldn’t have come to a better man, for
I know a lot about Jim Tovey that I don’t suppose he
ever told anybody else. You’ve heard of the Express Train
gang, I suppose?”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded. “It consists, I believe, of a
number of young men who frequent the racecourses, and
who meet in the evenings at the Express Train,” he
replied.</p>

<p>“They were the fellows outside the pub when poor old
Jim was murdered,” continued Mr. Copperdock significantly.
“Now the police, who know a lot more than most
people give them credit for, know all about that gang.
They’d had every man jack of them rounded up before
the Inspector came to see me and put them through it.
As the Inspector said, if Jim Tovey had been beaten up
with bits of iron pipe, or something like that, he could
have understood it. But the knife trick didn’t sound like
the gang, somehow. None of them had the guts for
deliberate murder like that, and there seemed no reason why
they should have set upon Jim Tovey. He’d nothing to do
with racing, and he wasn’t likely to be carrying a lot of
money about with him.”</p>

<p>Again Mr. Ludgrove nodded. “I see the point,” he said.</p>

<p>“Yes, but you don’t know what I know,” replied Mr.
Copperdock darkly. “The leader of the gang is young Wal
Snyder. Decent lad he used to be, I knew his father years
ago before he died. He and my Ted used to go to school
together, and I managed to get him a job as errand boy.
Then he got into bad company, run away from his job,
and has been hanging about doing nothing ever since.
Now, if you please, this young rip had the sauce to walk
into Tovey’s shop a few weeks ago, and ask if Miss Ivy
was in. Jim asks him what he wants her for, and he says
that he knew her as a child, and as she’d turned out such
a fine girl he’d like to take her out on the spree one fine
evening. Jim tole me he fair lost his temper at that; I
don’t know exactly what he said to young Wal, but he
let him know pretty straight that if he found him
hanging round Ivy he’d put the police on his track. The young
scamp cleared out, telling him he’d better look out for
himself.”</p>

<p>“Ah, this throws a new light upon the matter!”
commented Mr. Ludgrove, with polite interest.</p>

<p>“Better look out for himself,” repeated Mr. Copperdock
with careful emphasis. “A regular threat, mark you.
Jim didn’t say anything about Wal to Ivy or her mother,
you never know how women will take these things. Of
course, I told the Inspector about it, and he took it all
down in his book. He’d already seen Wal, together with
the rest of the gang. It seems they’d had a pretty good
week, and most of ’em confessed they were a bit on, and
didn’t remember much after they was chucked out of the
pub. But young Wal said he remembered an old chap
barging into him—he said he didn’t recognize him—and
just behind him was a fellow who looked like a seaman.
He couldn’t say much about this other fellow, except that
he had a sort of woollen cap covering his head, a
fierce-looking black beard, and a great scar right across his
cheek. Said he looked like one of them Russian
Bolsheviks. Of course, there was a lot of people on the pavement,
but he was the only one he noticed.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. “I am inclined to think that the
story does credit to the young man’s imagination,” he said
quietly. “I can’t say that I’ve ever seen a Bolshevik sailor
wandering about Praed Street on a Sunday evening.”</p>

<p>“Nor hasn’t anybody else,” replied Mr. Copperdock
scornfully, “what’s more, the policeman, who was on the
spot pretty sharp, didn’t see anybody like this man in the
crowd. There’s no question but what Wal Snyder invented
this story to cover himself. It’s all plain as daylight to
me—ah, but there’s one thing I haven’t told you.
Remember I said that poor old Jim had been sent for to
St. Martha’s to identify an accident case? Well, that was
all my eye. There hadn’t been no accident and St. Martha’s
hadn’t rung him up at all. It was just a trick to get
him out into Praed Street.”</p>

<p>“It ought to be possible for the police to trace where
the call came from,” suggested Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“Of course. The Inspector told me they’d done that
already, but it didn’t get them much further. The call
came from one of the boxes at Paddington station, one
of them automatic contraptions where you press the
button when you’re through. If you’re sharp with the
button, there’s nothing to tell the people you’re speaking
to that you’re speaking from a box. And, of course, at a
place like Paddington there’s no one to see who goes in
and out of those boxes.”</p>

<p>“I see. And where was Wal Snyder when the call was
made?”</p>

<p>“Oh, in the Express Train all right. He’d got his alibi
fixed up, no fear of that. Put one of his pals on to that
job, the cunning young devil. And then, of course, he’d
watch till Jim came past the pub on his way home, and the
rest was easy.”</p>

<p>“And what did your friend the Inspector think of all
this?” inquired Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“He didn’t say much,” confessed Mr. Copperdock. “But
the police ain’t such fools as you might think. Young Wal
Snyder will have to go through it, you mark my words.
Well, I’d best be getting back home. You never know
when I shan’t be wanted to give evidence or something.”</p>

<p>And with that he rose and stalked out of the back room,
leaving Mr. Ludgrove with a thoughtful expression on
his face.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch03">

<h2>Chapter III. <br/> The Inquest</h2>

<p>The inquest upon Mr. Tovey, although it was reported
at length in all the evening papers, did not throw any
further light upon the identity of his murderer. The
knife was produced and handed round for examination.
There was, however, nothing extraordinary about it,
except perhaps its inordinate length and the fact that it had
no handle.</p>

<p>A cutler, called as an expert witness, identified it as the
blade of a paper-cutter’s knife, carefully ground down so
as to obliterate the maker’s name and also to produce an
edge all the way up as well as at the point. Such blades
were usually supplied with a wooden handle, into which
they fitted loosely, being secured by means of a set-screw.
This witness agreed that knives of this type were rarely
seen in ordinary use, but that they were made in
considerable quantities for use in certain trades. There would
be no difficulty in purchasing one.</p>

<p>Wal Snyder, with a mixture of glibness and injured
innocence, gave his version of the affair. But the atmosphere
of the coroner’s court, so painfully reminiscent of the
police court, reduced him in a very short time to
stuttering incoherence. Yes, he had caught sight of somebody
just as the dead man fell. Hadn’t never seen him before,
biggish fellow with a lot of black hair, and an ugly-looking
cut across his cheeks, like as if he’d been slashed
with a knife. Asked why he thought he was a sailor, Wal
replied that he wore a woollen cap and a coat and trousers
like the sailors wear. He knew because he had got pals
down the West India Dock Road. Asked again if he had
any reason to suppose that this was the man who stabbed
the deceased, Wal became more confused than ever. Well,
then, had he seen him strike the blow? Wal had not, but
incautiously advanced the opinion that he looked just the
sort of cove who’d do a thing like that.</p>

<p>This brought the whole weight of the coroner’s
displeasure upon his unlucky head. He was told to stand
down and not talk nonsense. Then his appalled ear was
assailed by an exact and monotonous catalogue of the
misdemeanours committed by himself in particular and
the Express Train gang in general; things which he fondly
believed were known only to himself and a few chosen
associates. They ranged from petty larceny to assault and
battery, but the Inspector who recited them seemed to
treat them with contempt. He smiled as he replied to the
coroner’s questions.</p>

<p>“No, sir, I don’t believe any of them have the
intelligence or the pluck to plan a murder like this,” he said,
“nor do I think that they would be likely to play any of
their games outside the Express Train, under the very
eyes of the police. In fact, sir, we have no evidence that
any of them was in any way connected with the crime.”</p>

<p>The constable who had been first on the scene proved
an excellent witness, and earned the coroner’s commendation.
He had been standing, at about half-past nine on the
previous Sunday evening, on the pavement opposite the
Express Train. There had been complaints of disorderliness
in Praed Street at closing time. There had been a
large number of people passing along the pavement, and
the sudden surge of twenty or thirty men from the door of
the public house caused a few moments confusion. He
heard a lot of shouting, then saw a man fall on the
pavement. A group immediately gathered round the fallen man
and hid him from sight until he pushed them aside.</p>

<p>Asked if he could form any estimate of the time which
elapsed between his seeing the man fall and his reaching
his side, the constable said, it could not have been more
than fifteen seconds. He did not see anybody resembling
the black haired sailor described by a previous witness,
but had there been such a man he would have had ample
time to disappear in the crowd in the interval. He could
not distinguish faces across the street, it was too foggy.
His ambulance training had convinced him that the
deceased was dead when he reached him.</p>

<p>A house-surgeon at St. Martha’s described the wound.
It would not require the exercise of any great force to
drive the knife in, but the location of the blow showed a
certain knowledge of anatomy. The knife had passed
right through the outer clothing of the deceased; it was
only when the body was undressed that it was discovered.
It seemed difficult to imagine how a man holding a blade
without a handle could have driven it in so far. Death
from such a wound would be practically instantaneous, but
there would be no external hæmorrhage.</p>

<p>The coroner, addressing the jury, made it quite plain
that although there was no doubt how deceased met his
death there was no evidence as to how the blow was
delivered. The jury, taking their clue from his remarks,
found that the deceased had been murdered by some
persons or persons unknown, and added a rider expressing
their sympathy with his widow and daughter.</p>

<p>Mr. Samuel Copperdock, who had escorted Mrs. Tovey
and Ivy to the court, brought them back to his place
in Praed Street for tea. In Mr. Copperdock’s mind there
still lingered a strong suspicion that Wal Snyder and the
Express Train gang were in some way mixed up in the
affair. His disappointment that someone had not been
brought to book made him unusually silent, and it was
not until tea was over, and he and Mrs. Tovey were
ensconced in arm-chairs in his comfortable parlour, that
he resumed his accustomed cheerfulness.</p>

<p>Mrs. Tovey, a voluminous figure in the deepest of
black, had taken the tragedy with her accustomed philosophy.
She was not the sort of woman to give way to despair;
and all her life she had faced the ups and down of
fortune with the same outward placidity. Her inner
feelings were her own concern; even her husband had never
attempted to probe their depth. Besides, Mrs. Tovey
belonged to a class which cannot afford to let sentiment
interfere with the practical considerations of the moment.</p>

<p>“I shall keep on the business,” she was saying. “ ’Tisn’t
as though I’d been left without a penny, in a manner of
speaking. Jim had a tidy bit put away; he always used
to say he was saving it up for our old age. Then there’ll
be the insurance money. Ivy’s a good girl, she hasn’t cost
us nothing for the last year or two, and it’s her I’m
thinking of mostly. She’ll want a home yet for a bit, and she
couldn’t have a better one.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock glanced over his shoulder towards the
other end of the room, where Ivy and Ted were holding
an earnest conversation in low tones. It was Thursday
afternoon, early closing day, and the shop below was shut,
a circumstance for which Ted appeared devoutly
grateful.</p>

<p>“I shouldn’t wonder if you lost Ivy before very long,”
said Mr. Copperdock slyly. “But she’s a good girl, as
you say. But you’ll never manage the business by
yourself, Mrs. Tovey. Who’s going along to do the bit of buying
of a morning?”</p>

<p>“I’ll manage easy enough,” replied Mrs. Tovey
confidently. “I shall take young Alf into the shop, and get
another lad to drive the van. You’ll find I’ll manage to
rub along very comfortable, Mr. Copperdock.”</p>

<p>They entered upon an earnest discussion of the science
of greengrocery, heedless of the equally earnest discussion
which was going on behind their backs.</p>

<p>“No, it’s no use, Ted, not yet,” Ivy was saying. “You
none of you seem to understand quite. It’s different for
Mum; she’s got the business to look after, and she doesn’t
think of anything else. I can’t forget how good Dad always
was to me, and we just couldn’t do anything he wouldn’t
have liked.”</p>

<p>“You mean he wouldn’t have liked you to—to walk
out with me?” put in Ted, half resentfully.</p>

<p>Ivy blushed in spite of herself. “It wasn’t that, exactly,”
she replied. “Mind, he never said anything to me, but
I’ve got it out of Mum since. He always wanted me to—to
get on in the world, and be a credit to the education
he’s given me. And I feel that even now he’s dead, I’ve
got to try and do what he wanted.”</p>

<p>“It isn’t that there’s anybody else?” he suggested with
a note of anxiety in his voice.</p>

<p>“There isn’t anybody else, Ted,” she replied, looking
him straight in the face. “But I’m not going to promise
anything until I’ve got over the shock of his being killed
like that. Oh, Ted, who can have done it? He hadn’t an
enemy in the world, not a real enemy, I mean.”</p>

<p>Ted shook his head helplessly. “I can’t make it out,”
he replied. “I can’t believe Wal Snyder had anything to
do with it. After all, if—if he wanted to be friends with
you, it wasn’t the way to go about it.”</p>

<p>“Wal Snyder must have known perfectly well that I’d
never have had anything to do with him,” exclaimed Ivy
indignantly. The disclosure of that episode at the inquest
had roused her to a pitch of anger she rarely displayed.
“Besides, he’s too much of a worm to do a thing like that.
I’d like to see him hanged, just the same.”</p>

<p>Ted tactfully disregarded this piece of feminine logic.
“It must have been some lunatic, or perhaps, whoever it
was mistook your father for someone else,” he replied
vaguely.</p>

<p>“And sent him that telephone message first,” she struck
in, with a touch of scorn. “No, poor Dad was murdered
deliberately. Oh, Ted, if only I were a man, and could find
out who did it!”</p>

<p>Ted, looking at her clenched hands and tear-filled
eyes, felt suddenly the urge of a great resolve. “Ivy, if
I were to find out who it was, would you marry me?” he
exclaimed impulsively.</p>

<p>Her eyes dropped before his ardent gaze. “Perhaps,”
she murmured.</p>

<p>Their further conversation was interrupted by the
stately rising of Mrs. Tovey from her chair.</p>

<p>“Come along, Ivy,” she said. “It’s time we were getting
along home.”</p>

<p>Ivy rose obediently, as Mr. Copperdock helped her
mother into her cloak. “Ted’ll see you home, Mrs. Tovey,”
he said. “I don’t like the thought of your being about the
streets alone.”</p>

<p>“That’s very kind of you, Mr. Copperdock,” replied
Mrs. Tovey. “I really don’t know what I should have
done if it hadn’t been for all your goodness. You’ll come
back to our place to-morrow and have a bit of something
after the funeral?”</p>

<p>“I’d be very glad to, Mrs. Tovey,” said Mr. Copperdock.
He walked with them as far as the door of the
shop, and stood there a few seconds, until he lost sight
of Mrs. Tovey’s ample form among the crowd. Then he
walked slowly up the stairs, and flung himself into his own
particular chair.</p>

<p>“I wonder if she suspects anything?” he muttered, with
a reflective frown. “I’ll have to go cautious-like, I can
see that.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock sat for a long time, motionless, his
usually cheerful face furrowed in deep thought. He hated
being alone at any time, but somehow this evening it was
doubly distasteful. Ted was a long time coming back; no
doubt Mrs. Tovey, hospitable soul, had asked him to step
in. It was no good stepping across to Elmer Ludgrove’s;
Thursday afternoon was that gentleman’s busiest day of
the week. The herbalist never closed on Thursday. His
customers were for the most part people who were engaged
in trade, and the weekly half-holiday was their only
opportunity for consultations. Also it seemed a long time
before it would be his usual hour for going to the
Cambridge Arms. Mr. Copperdock consoled himself with the
thought that, as one who had actually attended the inquest,
he would not lack an attentive audience.</p>

<p>In due course Ted came back, with a suppressed light
of excitement in his eyes. He said very little until they
had finished tea, and then, <i>à propos</i> of nothing in
particular, he burst out with the subject which occupied his
mind. “I say, Dad, I would like to find out who killed
poor old Tovey!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock glanced at him in astonishment.
“Would you, my lad?” he replied sarcastically. “Think
you’re a sucking Sherlock Holmes, perhaps? You take it
from me, if the police can’t lay their hands on the chap,
’tain’t likely you will.”</p>

<p>Ted sighed heavily. In his heart of hearts he was of
the same opinion himself. But the magnificence of the
reward had blinded him to the difficulties which lay in
his path. In every thriller which he had ever read the hero
had at least the fragment of a clue to work upon. But
rack his brains as he would, Ted could not hit upon the
faintest idea of how to set about looking for one.</p>

<p>His father continued to look at him with a not
unkindly smile. “I dessay you think that Ivy would give a
lot to know, eh?” he said, his native shrewdness carrying
him straight to the point. “Well, I wouldn’t be
disheartened if I was you. Women’s queer folk, and they
often takes the will for the deed, as the saying is. But
you stick to the tobacco trade, my boy, and don’t go trying
no detective tricks on your own, or you’ll find yourself
in trouble.”</p>

<p>It was not until the following evening that Mr.
Copperdock had a chance of a word with Mr. Ludgrove. The
excitement engendered by Mr. Tovey’s funeral had kept
him busy all the morning, and on his return from that
ceremony he had found the herbalist’s shop full of people.
But as he was coming back from his evening visit to the
Cambridge Arms, he overtook Mr. Ludgrove, who was
strolling with a leisurely air along the pavement of Praed
Street.</p>

<p>They were glad to see one another. “I have been hoping
for a chance of a chat with you ever since yesterday,”
said Mr. Ludgrove. “Of course, I read the report of the
inquest in the papers, but naturally I should be
interested in a fuller description. As you see, I am on my way
home from my usual evening stroll. Would you care to
come in for a few minutes?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock laid his hand on his friend’s arm. “No,
no, you come over to my place,” he replied hospitably.
“Ted’s sure to have a decent fire going, and there’s a bottle
of whiskey in the cupboard. And it’s rarely enough you
find time to come and see me, and that’s a fact.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove agreed, and for the second time the
tobacconist went over the story of the inquest. His son
listened attentively, not so much to his father’s words
as to the comments of the herbalist. He had great faith in
Mr. Ludgrove’s wisdom, and he felt that at any time he
might suggest some clue which could be followed up.</p>

<p>But Mr. Ludgrove disappointed him. “It is really the
most remarkable affair,” he said as his friend came to the
end of his recital. “I confess that I have puzzled over it
more than once since last Monday morning. In fact, I
have no doubt that I shall amuse myself by speculating
upon it during the week-end.”</p>

<p>“Going away?” asked Mr. Copperdock incuriously.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded. “I hope to catch the 12.35 from
Liverpool Street to-morrow,” he replied.</p>

<p>“Weed hunting, as usual?” said Mr. Copperdock
facetiously.</p>

<p>“If you like to call it so,” answered Mr. Ludgrove.
“As you know, I employ most of my week-ends looking
for our rarer English plants. It has become the custom to
sneer at the simple remedies of our ancestors, but I assure
you that there are plants growing in the hedgerow, if one
can only find them, which will cure almost any human
complaint, and it is my favourite practice to seek for
them.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock shook his head. “Can’t say as I
should find much fun in it,” he said. “Too lonely a
business altogether. I likes to have someone to talk to when
I’m on a holiday. And where might you be going this
time?”</p>

<p>“A little place I know in Suffolk, not very far from
Ipswich. Now why don’t you come with me, Mr. Copperdock?
I shall stay at the inn, a most pleasant little place,
and we could go out searching for plants together.”</p>

<p>But Mr. Copperdock was not to be tempted. “It’s very
good of you, I’m sure,” he replied. “But, as a matter of
fact, the country isn’t very alive, leastways not at this time
of the year. Perhaps I’ll come with you some time in the
summer, if you’re going to stay at a decent little pub.
Some of them country pubs ain’t half bad if you’re
thirsty.”</p>

<p>After a little further conversation Mr. Ludgrove took
his departure, and Mr. Copperdock, after a final drink,
retired to bed. But it is to be feared that his thoughts
gave him very little rest. He almost regretted that he had
not accepted Ludgrove’s invitation. For it was being
slowly borne in upon him that his agitation would drive
him to confide in the wisdom of the herbalist. Ludgrove
could be trusted not to give him away, and would
certainly give him good advice.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch04">

<h2>Chapter IV. <br/> The Poisoned Pipe-stem</h2>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove returned from Suffolk by a late train on
Sunday night, burdened with a capacious suit-case, which
he laid on the bench in the inner room. He made himself
a cup of cocoa, and then proceeded leisurely to unpack
the case.</p>

<p>It contained a carefully arranged mass of plants, which
he laid out in rows, attaching to each a label upon which
he scribbled its name. He was thus busily engaged, when
he was interrupted by a loud knocking upon the door of
the shop, which he had locked behind him.</p>

<p>The herbalist was not a man who allowed himself to
be disturbed by trifles. He merely smiled and glanced at
his plants, not a half of which were yet properly classified.
Then he went towards the door. It had sometimes
happened that one of his clients, in urgent need of his
services, had hammered on the door during the hours when
the shop was shut. Mr. Ludgrove, if he happened to be
within, made a point of answering these summonses. At
any hour he was prepared to do what he could to relieve
pain or anxiety.</p>

<p>The door opened, disclosing a short, stout figure upon
the step. The rather austere lines of Mr. Ludgrove’s face
widened into a smile of hospitable welcome.</p>

<p>“Come in, Mr. Copperdock!” he exclaimed. “I haven’t
been back more than a few minutes, but there’s a fire in
the back room.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock nodded. “Thanks, Ludgrove,” he said,
as he came in. “I know you’re just back, I saw you come
in. And I thought to myself that this was a very good
chance of having a few minutes’ chat with you.”</p>

<p>“I’m only too glad you came over,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove, leading the way to the back room. “Bring that
chair up closer to the fire. I’ve just made myself a cup of
cocoa. Will you have one, too? the kettle’s still boiling.”</p>

<p>“Not for me, thank you kindly all the same,” said Mr.
Copperdock. “Cocoa’s not exactly in my line. A man of
my age can’t afford to put on weight, you know.”</p>

<p>His eyes strayed towards a cupboard in the corner of
the room, the door of which his host had already opened.
From it appeared a bottle of whiskey and a siphon, which
were placed on the table within reach of Mr. Copperdock’s
hand. At a gesture from Mr. Ludgrove, the tobacconist
poured himself out a drink and held it to his lips. It was
noticeable that his hand trembled slightly as he did so.</p>

<p>For a minute or so Mr. Copperdock sat silently in his
chair, glancing nervously about the room. It was obvious
that he had something on his mind, but could not find the
words in which to unburden himself. His host, skilled in
the art of encouraging the tongue-tied, appeared not to
notice his confusion, and strolled over towards the bench
upon which his harvest was laid out.</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock’s eyes followed him. “Hullo, did you
bring that lot back with you this time?” he enquired in a
tone which he endeavoured to render conversational.</p>

<p>“Yes, they’re rather a good collection,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove. “There are one or two quite scarce plants
among them, of which I have been anxious to secure
specimens for a long time. I had a most enjoyable time.
You ought to have come with me, Mr. Copperdock.”</p>

<p>“I wish I had, I’d have been saved a deal of worry,”
said Mr. Copperdock fervently. Then, with scarcely a
pause, he added, “Do you know old Ben Colburn?”</p>

<p>“The baker at the other end of the street?” replied
Mr. Ludgrove. “I always buy my bread at his shop, but I
hardly know Ben Colburn himself, I have seen his son
Dick several times. Isn’t Dick a friend of your lad’s?”</p>

<p>For an instant Mr. Copperdock made no reply. His
face grew even redder than usual, and he picked with his
fingers at the arms of his chair. Mr. Ludgrove, recognising
the symptoms, knew that at last he was approaching the
point of this late visit. He walked across the room, sat
down in the chair on the opposite side of the fire, and
waited.</p>

<p>“Old Ben Colburn’s dead,” blurted out the tobacconist
at last, as though the words had been torn from his lips.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove raised his eyebrows, “Indeed?” he
murmured. “Rather a sudden end, surely? I was in the shop
on Friday, talking to Dick, and he said nothing of his
father being ill.”</p>

<p>“No, he wouldn’t,” said Mr. Copperdock grimly, “He
wasn’t taken ill until about two o’clock yesterday
afternoon, and he was dead by tea-time.”</p>

<p>“The usual story in such cases, I suppose?” suggested
Mr. Ludgrove. “A diseased heart, and a sudden attack
ending fatally?”</p>

<p>“Worse than that,” replied Mr. Copperdock slowly.
Then suddenly he raised his eyes and looked fixedly at
his host. “What do you know about young Dick?” he
asked.</p>

<p>It was the herbalist’s turn to hesitate, “I might reply
that I am a customer of his,” he said at last. “It would
be the truth, but not the whole truth. To you, I do not
mind admitting in the strictest confidence that he has
several times come to me for advice. You will forgive me
if I am unable to tell you anything further.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock nodded. It was well known that Mr.
Ludgrove had never divulged even a hint of the curious
stories which had been told him in hesitating whispers in
the privacy of this very room. It was the certain knowledge
that this was so which gave so many of his clients
the courage to confess to him their most secret troubles.</p>

<p>“Well, put it this way,” said Mr. Copperdock. “You
know that young Dick and his father didn’t hit it off
quite, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“I may as well confess to that knowledge, since neither
of them have made any secret of the fact,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“Old Ben was a bit of a character in his way,”
continued Mr. Copperdock. “He used to drop in sometimes
at the Cambridge Arms, and I got to know him quite well,
in an off-hand sort of way. He had the idea that he was
the only man in London who could bake bread, and he
often used to tell me that he spent all day and half the
night in the bakehouse. He said it was the finest one of
its size anywhere, and he used to take me round and look
at it sometimes. I couldn’t see anything wonderful about
it, but that don’t matter. Ever been there yourself?”</p>

<p>“Never into the bakehouse. I have been into the shop
at least twice a week for the last four years,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“Well, the bakehouse is away behind, you go up a
long passage from the shop to get to it. Old Ben spent
most of his time in the bakehouse, leaving the shop to
the lad. But he was a suspicious old cove, and he always
had it in his mind that Dick was trying to make a bit
out of the business. Couldn’t blame him if he had, the old
man kept him short enough. But Dick hadn’t much chance.
There’s a cash register in the shop, through which every
penny of the takings has to pass.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded. “I know, I’ve often noticed
it,” he agreed.</p>

<p>“Every afternoon between two and three, when he’d
had his dinner, old Ben used to come into the shop and sit
at the cash register, checking the takings. And he always
smoked a pipe while he was doing it. Queer thing he never
smoked in the bakehouse, only just this one pipe in the
day. He would smoke it through, then refill it and put it
on a shelf in the corner of the shop, ready for the next
day. I suppose he done the same thing every day for a
dozen years or more. Now, you remember that Friday was
poor Jim Tovey’s funeral?”</p>

<p>“I do,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “You remember that
I came in to see you that same evening.”</p>

<p>“So you did. Well, while I was out, Old Ben comes
round to my place to buy a pipe. He only kept one going
at a time, and when the old one cracked he bought a
new one. Always came to me for them, he did. Ted sold
him one of the kind he always has, and out he goes.</p>

<p>“Mind you, this is what Ted tells me. The rest of the
story, Ted told me last night, after I got back from the
Cambridge Arms. Seems young Dick had been in when
I was over there and told him all about it. Old Ben goes
back to his place, fills his new pipe, and puts it on the
shelf ready for his usual smoke on Saturday afternoon.
Dick swears nobody touched it in the meantime. The old
man was very fussy about his pipe, and it was always
left alone.</p>

<p>“On Saturday, yesterday, that is, Ben comes back from
his dinner a little after two, and the first thing he does is
to pick up his pipe and light it. All at once he takes it out
of his mouth and cusses. Dick asks him what’s the matter,
and he says that the mouthpiece is rough and that he’s
scratched his tongue on it. They have a look at the pipe
together, and the old man finds a tiny splinter of glass
stuck to the mouthpiece. He scrapes it off with a knife,
lights his pipe again, and Dick goes out to get his dinner,
same as he always does when the old man comes into the
shop.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock paused, and the herbalist, who had
been listening attentively, took the opportunity of putting
in a question. “Mrs. Colburn has been dead some little
time, I believe?”</p>

<p>“Yes, ten years or more, if my memory serves me
right. Dick and his father lived over the shop, with a
charwoman to come in and do for them in the morning.
When Dick comes back from his dinner, a little before
three, the old man was still sitting at the cash register,
and Dick sees at once that something is wrong. The old
chap can hardly speak, says his tongue’s very swollen,
and that he feels stiff all over. Dick slips out sharp and
gets a doctor, and between them they gets Ben upstairs
to bed. Doctor, he did what he could, but it wasn’t any
use, and poor old Ben dies in two or three hours.”</p>

<p>“What an extraordinary thing!” exclaimed Mr.
Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“That’s what the doctor said. He wanted to find the
bit of glass which had scratched old Ben’s tongue, and
he and Dick had a hunt for it, but it must have fallen
on the floor of the shop. It was only a tiny piece, anyway.
Of course they never found it, but the doctor says there
must have been some extraordinary powerful poison on it,
and I can’t see how a bit of glass like that could get
stuck on the mouthpiece of a pipe accidental like.”</p>

<p>“Of course, nicotine acts as a poison if it is injected
into the blood,” suggested Mr. Ludgrove. “It is just
possible that the fragment of glass was harmless enough, but
that the nicotine in the pipe found its way into the
scratch.” But Mr. Copperdock shook his head. “It was
a new pipe, what hadn’t ever been smoked before,” he
replied. “Bought at my place the day before, as I told
you.”</p>

<p>“Did your son examine the pipe before he gave it to
Mr. Colburn?” asked Mr. Ludgrove quickly.</p>

<p>“That’s just what I asked him, and he says he can’t
be sure. Of course, he didn’t see any glass or he’d have
given old Ben another pipe. We gets them in dozens, each
pipe twisted up in a bit of paper. Ted took the first that
came out of the box, tore the paper off it, and handed it
to Ben, who put it straight into his pocket. I’ve looked at
the rest of the box since, and there’s no sign of any glass
on any of them.”</p>

<p>“You say that Mr. Colburn filled the pipe as soon as
he got home, and put it in the usual place,” said Mr.
Ludgrove slowly. “It was lying there until two o’clock on
Saturday. Anybody might have tampered with it in the
meanwhile. The cash register, and I suppose the shelf
where the pipe was kept, is within easy reach of anybody
coming into the shop.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid that won’t work,” replied Mr. Copperdock,
shaking his head. “There’s not one in a thousand as goes
into the shop that know’s the pipe’s there. You didn’t
yourself till I told you just now, yet you say you’re a
regular customer. No, if that pipe was tampered with, it
was somebody on the other side of the counter what
did it.”</p>

<p>“Then you are quite convinced in your own mind that
Mr. Colburn was deliberately murdered?” suggested Mr.
Ludgrove. “But what motive could anybody have for
desiring his death?”</p>

<p>“What motive had anybody for murdering poor old
Jim Tovey last week?” retorted Mr. Copperdock. “There’s
only one person who gains anything by Ben’s death, and
who that is you know as well as I do!”</p>

<p>“I can’t help thinking that you are taking too grave
a view of the case,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “I admit that it
is difficult to account for a piece of poisoned glass finding
its way on to Mr. Colburn’s pipe by accident, but murder
is a very grave charge, and there is hardly sufficient
evidence at the moment to warrant it.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock braced himself in his chair as though
to give himself the strength to utter his next words.
“Ludgrove,” he said impressively. “I <em>know</em> poor Ben Colburn
was murdered, same as I know Jim Tovey was murdered.
And it was the same hand as struck them both down.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove sank slowly back into his chair, and a
faint smile twinkled for a moment at the corner of his
lips. But before he could make any remark, Mr.
Copperdock, who had been watching him closely, continued.</p>

<p>“It’s all very well for you to laugh, but neither you
nor any other living soul knows what I do. Now just you
listen, and see if I’m not right. Last Wednesday, I was
in the Cambridge Arms in the evening, same as I almost
always am. In comes old Ben Colburn, and comes straight
over to me. He puts his hand in his pocket, and slaps an
ordinary bone counter down on the table in front of me.
‘Now then, Sam, what’s the meaning of this little joke?’
he says.</p>

<p>“I looks at the counter and I looks at him. ‘What do you
mean, what’s the joke?’ I says.</p>

<p>“Why, didn’t you send me this?” he says, suspicious
like.</p>

<p>“I told him I hadn’t, and then he says that it came
to him by post that morning, wrapped up in a bit of
blank paper. ‘I made sure it was one of your jokes, Sam,’
he says. I picked up the counter and looked at it. On
one side it had the figure II drawn on it in red ink. ‘What
does it mean?’ I said. ‘That’s just what I want to know,’
says Ben. ‘You shove it in your pocket, Sam, you’re better
at finding out that sort of thing than I am.’ So I shoved
it in my pocket, and here it is.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove took the counter which the tobacconist
handed him and looked at it curiously. It was just as
Mr. Copperdock had described it, a white bone counter,
about the size of a halfpenny, with the Roman numeral II,
carefully traced upon it in red ink.</p>

<p>“I never thought about it again, until this afternoon,”
continued Mr. Copperdock. “Naturally I didn’t connect
it with Ben’s death. Why should I? But to-day, being
Sunday, I went round to see Mrs. Tovey neighbour-like.
You see, it was her first Sunday after Jim’s death, and I
thought that she and Ivy might get brooding over things.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock looked anxiously at his friend as he
spoke, but the expression on the herbalist’s face was one
of polite interest only. “Very thoughtful of you, I’m sure,”
he murmured. “I hope that Mrs. Tovey is not taking her
husband’s death too much to heart.”</p>

<p>“She’s bearing up as well as can be expected,” replied
Mr. Copperdock. “She and I got to talking about Jim,
and wondering whoever it could have been that murdered
him. She was telling me all about the telephone call,
and she went on to say that this was the second queer
thing that happened just before he died. Naturally I asked
her what the first was, and she told me that on the Friday
morning before his death, a typewritten envelope came
addressed to him. He opened it, and all there was inside
was a white counter with the number I drawn on it in
red ink. Now what do you make of that?”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove sat silent for a moment under his friend’s
triumphant gaze, a thoughtful frown upon his face. “This
is most extraordinary,” he said at last. “If your facts
are correct—not that I doubt them for a moment, but I
know how fatally easy it is to find presages after the
event—it means that both Mr. Tovey and Mr. Colburn received,
a couple of days or so before their respective
deaths, a white counter bearing a numeral in red ink. It
is almost certain that both counters were sent by the same
person, and, if they were intended as a warning, we may
infer, as you said, that both men were murdered by the
same hand.”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock nodded rather impatiently. “Just what
I told you, all along,” he said.</p>

<p>“But, my dear sir, look at the difficulties which that
theory entails,” objected Mr. Ludgrove. “We are agreed
that it is impossible to think of any motive for the murder
of Mr. Tovey, and I at least am inclined to say the same
regarding the murder of Mr. Colburn. Yet now we are
faced with the problem of finding a man who had a motive
for murdering both of them. By the way, do you happen
to know if they were ever associated in any way?”</p>

<p>“Never!” replied Mr. Copperdock emphatically. “Although
they’d both lived in these parts most of their lives,
I don’t suppose they even knew one another by sight.”</p>

<p>“The fact that they had nothing in common makes it
all the more puzzling,” said Mr. Ludgrove reflectively.
“But perhaps you have thought of a way out of the
difficulty?”</p>

<p>A cloud came over Mr. Copperdock’s naturally cheerful
face, and there was a marked hesitancy in his tone
as he replied. “Aye, I have thought of something, and
it’s that that’s been worrying me. Mind, I don’t believe
it myself, but I’m in mortal fear lest someone else
should see it too.”</p>

<p>“I think I can guess what you mean,” said Mr. Ludgrove
gently. “I know as well as you do that it isn’t true,
but we’re both of us too well aware of the mischief that
can be caused by whispering tongues to treat it as
unimportant. You mean that young Colburn was not on good
terms with his father, that he and your son are great
friends, and that your son sold Mr. Colburn the pipe which
is supposed to have been the agency of his death.”</p>

<p>“I do mean that,” replied Mr. Copperdock deliberately.
“I mean too that Ted is very sweet on Ivy Tovey, and that
poor old Jim wasn’t very keen on the idea. Now you see
the sort of lying whispers that might get about if all this
was known. And I’m blest if I see what I can do about it.”</p>

<p>“I think you told me that you had some conversation
with a Police Inspector last week on the subject of Mr.
Tovey’s murder?” suggested Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“That’s right,” replied Mr. Copperdock. “Very decent
sort of chap he was, too. What about him?”</p>

<p>“Do you know where and how to get hold of him?”</p>

<p>“Yes, he left me his card. I’ve got it at home
somewhere.”</p>

<p>“Well, Mr. Copperdock, if you will take my advice
you will go and see him, and tell him everything you
know, as you have just told me. It’s all bound to come
out, sooner or later, and if you have already informed the
police, your position will be all the stronger. Don’t you
agree?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose I do,” replied Mr. Copperdock
reluctantly. “But it seems terrible, like giving evidence
against my own flesh and blood.”</p>

<p>“On the contrary, you will be doing the very best for
your son. A frank statement of facts is always the best
defence of the innocent. Tell your friend the Inspector
everything, not forgetting the curious incident of the
numbered discs. He will know better than I do what advice
to give you in the matter. And, if you feel that I can
be of the slightest assistance to you, do not hesitate to
come to me at once.”</p>

<p>After some further discussion Mr. Copperdock agreed
to follow his friend’s advice, and, after a parting drink,
went home, somewhat comforted. The herbalist, having
locked the door behind him, returned to the interrupted
classification of his plants. But, from the slight frown
which passed across his face from time to time, one
might have guessed that he was thinking more of his
conversation with Mr. Copperdock than of the specimens
before him.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch05">

<h2>Chapter V. <br/> Inspector Whyland</h2>

<p>The death of Mr. Colburn, following so closely upon that
of Mr. Tovey, caused a distinct sensation in Praed Street
and its immediate neighbourhood. Suspicion was, so to
speak, in the air, and anybody known to have been
intimate with either of the dead men was looked at askance,
and became the subject of whispered comment when their
backs were turned. Not that this floating suspicion actually
settled down upon any individual head. But Praed Street
discovered an uneasy feeling that the two inexplicable
deaths of which it had been the scene indicated that it
harboured a murderer.</p>

<p>On the Wednesday morning following Mr. Ludgrove’s
visit to Suffolk, a man walked into his shop and rapped
upon the counter. The herbalist emerged from the back
room at the summons, and, as was his habit, glanced
gravely at his customer. He saw before him a youngish
man, immaculately dressed, who immediately turned
towards him interrogatively. “Mr. Ludgrove?” he said.</p>

<p>The herbalist bowed. “That is my name,” he replied.
“Can I be of any service to you?”</p>

<p>The stranger placed a card upon the counter, with an
apologetic gesture. “I’m Detective Inspector Whyland,
attached to the F Division,” he said. “And if you could
spare me a few minutes, I should be very grateful. I’m
awfully sorry to have to intrude in business hours.”</p>

<p>“Oh, pray do not apologize, I am rarely very busy in
the morning,” replied Mr. Ludgrove courteously.
“Perhaps you would not mind coming through this door. We
shall be able to talk more privately.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland accepted the invitation, and sat
down in the chair offered him. Mr. Ludgrove having
pressed him to smoke, sat down in the opposite chair, and
looked at him enquiringly.</p>

<p>“I daresay that you can guess what I have come to
talk about,” began the Inspector, with a pleasant smile.
“I may as well confess at once that I want your help.
We policemen are not the super-men which some people
think we ought to be, and most of us are only too anxious
to ask for assistance wherever we are likely to get it.
And I personally am under a debt of gratitude to you for
persuading Mr. Copperdock to unburden himself to me.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. “Oh, he told you, did he?” he
replied. “It was much the best thing he could do. I hope
he convinced you, as he certainly did me, that both he
and his son were completely innocent of any knowledge
of these queer happenings.”</p>

<p>It was the Inspector’s turn to smile. “He did. I don’t
think that Mr. Copperdock is of the stuff of which
deliberate murderers are made, and from what I have seen
of the son, I fancy the same applies to him. But may I,
since you appear to be pretty intimate with Mr.
Copperdock, ask you one or two questions about him? You
needn’t answer them unless you like.”</p>

<p>“Most certainly I will answer them to the best of my
ability,” replied Mr. Ludgrove gravely.</p>

<p>“Thank you. In the first place, can you suggest why he
is so obviously confused when any reference is made to
the Tovey family? I understand that his son and Tovey’s
daughter are—well, great friends, but that could hardly
account for his manner.”</p>

<p>Again Mr. Ludgrove smiled, this time with genuine
amusement. “My dear sir, haven’t you guessed the
reason? I did, some days ago. Mrs. Tovey is, I believe, a
very charming woman, and by no means too old to consider
the possibility of marrying again. Mind you, Mr.
Copperdock is convinced that his secret is safely locked
in his own breast, and I should forfeit his friendship if he
had any inkling that I shared it.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland laughed with an obvious air of relief.
“Oh, that’s the way the wind blows, is it?” he said.
“You may rest assured that I shall be the soul of
discretion. I had an uncomfortable feeling that he knew
something that he did not care to tell me. Now, if I may
trouble you with another question, what do you know of
the relations between the Copperdocks and the
Colburns?”</p>

<p>This time Mr. Ludgrove shook his head. “Nothing at
first hand,” he replied, “only what Mr. Copperdock has
told me, which is doubtless the same as what he told you.”</p>

<p>“You will forgive my pressing the point, Mr. Ludgrove,”
persisted the Inspector. “But I gather from Mr.
Copperdock’s remarks that you are to some extent in the
confidence of young Colburn.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove looked him straight in the face.
“Inspector Whyland,” he said gravely, “I should like you
fully to realize my position. Many of the inhabitants of
this part of London believe, rightly or wrongly, that my
experience of the world is greater than theirs.
Consequently they frequently seek my advice upon the most
personal and intimate matters. I have been the recipient
of many confidences, which it has been my invariable
rule never to mention to a third person. Dick Colburn has
consulted me more than once, and it is only because I
believe it to be in his interest that I am prepared to break
my rule in his case.”</p>

<p>“I fully appreciate your motives, Mr. Ludgrove,”
replied the Inspector. “I will make no use of anything you
care to tell me without your permission.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Inspector,” said Mr. Ludgrove simply.
“Dick Colburn informed me some months ago that he
found it very difficult to get on with his father. His chief
complaint was that although he performed the whole
work of the shop, his father treated him as though he
were still a child, and refused to allow him any share
of the profits of the business. I advised him to persuade
his father to admit him into partnership, and if he proved
obdurate, to announce his intention of seeking work
elsewhere. I think it is only fair to add that the lad came to
see me yesterday evening, in order to assure me that he
had no share in his father’s death.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland shrugged his shoulders. “In spite of
appearances I am inclined to believe him,” he replied
wearily. “Frankly, Mr. Ludgrove, I am completely at a
loss. As you know, the jury at the inquest on Mr. Colburn
returned an open verdict, but I think there can be very
little doubt that he was deliberately murdered. We can
rule out suicide, people don’t take such elaborate steps
to kill themselves. And the circumstances seem too
remarkable to be accidental, which brings us back to Mr.
Copperdock and his remarkable story of the numbered
discs. What do you make of that, Mr. Ludgrove?”</p>

<p>“Very little, although I have puzzled over it a good
deal, since I heard it,” replied the herbalist. “Of course,
it is possible that the receipt by Mr. Colburn of the one
you have doubtless seen had nothing whatever to do with
his death, and that the combined imagination of Mr.
Copperdock and Mrs. Tovey evolved the first out of
something equally harmless. Mrs. Tovey is the only
person who claims to have seen it, I understand.”</p>

<p>“And yet her accounts of it are remarkably consistent,”
said the Inspector. “I went to see her and introduced the
subject as tactfully as I could. She described the incident
in almost exactly the same words as Mr. Copperdock
used, and added that her husband, attaching no importance
to it, threw counter, envelope and all into the fire.
Her daughter, Ivy, was not present at the time. And yet,
if we apply the obvious deduction to the sending of these
numbered counters, what possible motive could anybody
have for murdering two peaceful and elderly tradesmen,
apparently strangers to one another, or, still more, for
warning them first? It only adds another problem to this
extraordinary business.”</p>

<p>“Are you going to make the story of the numbered
counters public?” asked Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“One of my reasons for coming to see you was to ask
you to say nothing about it,” replied the Inspector. “We
have decided that there is nothing to be gained by letting
it be known. Bone counters of this size are very
common, and we are not likely to learn where these particular
ones originated. On the other hand, the minute the story
becomes known, there will be an epidemic of counters
bearing the number III in red ink. The Post Office will
be overwhelmed by envelopes containing them, and every
one of the recipients will come clamouring to us for
protection. You may think this is an exaggeration. But you
have no idea of the effect of crime upon some people’s
mentality.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove laughed softly. “I think I have,” he
replied. “I haven’t been a sort of confidential adviser to the
poorer classes all these years for nothing. Nearly
everybody who has been in this room for the last week has had
definite knowledge of the murderer of Mr. Tovey, for
which knowledge they seem to think it is my duty to pay
a large sum of money. When I tell them to go to the police
their enthusiasm evaporates with amazing rapidity. And
since you people offered a reward for Wal Snyder’s sailor,
the whole neighbourhood appears to have seen him.”</p>

<p>“So I imagine,” said the Inspector. “There is usually
a queue at the police station waiting to claim the reward.
But what could we do? I confess I was very sceptical about
the existence of this man; but I’ve bullied the wretched
Wal half a dozen times, drunk and sober, and he sticks to
the story. ‘S’welp me, it’s as true as I’m standing here,’
he says, ‘a big tall bloke, dressed like a sailor, with a
black beard, an ugly gash on his cheek, and a woollen
cap.’ We had no option but to advertise for such a man.”</p>

<p>“Well, I hope you’ll find him, Inspector,” remarked Mr.
Ludgrove. “But you’ll forgive my saying that I have grave
doubts about it. Even Mr. Copperdock, who spends a
large part of his time watching the people who pass his
shop, has never seen anybody answering his description.
And again I find it difficult to imagine a black-bearded
sailor with a scar having a grudge against Mr. Tovey.
Besides, he doesn’t sound the sort of person to deliver
numbered counters in typewritten envelopes.”</p>

<p>The Inspector rose from his chair with a smile. “It is
a maxim of the police never to admit defeat,” he said.
“I am immensely obliged to you for your courtesy, Mr.
Ludgrove. Perhaps if you hear of anything which has any
possible bearing on the case you will send for me?”</p>

<p>The herbalist willingly consenting to this, Inspector
Whyland took his departure. He had scarcely been gone
five minutes before Mr. Ludgrove, who had returned to
the back room, heard Mr. Copperdock’s voice in the shop.</p>

<p>“Come in, Mr. Copperdock,” called the herbalist
genially.</p>

<p>The curtain was furtively drawn aside, and Mr.
Copperdock came in, a look of deep anxiety upon his face.
“That was Inspector Whyland in here just now, wasn’t
it?” he enquired.</p>

<p>“It was,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “We had quite a long
chat.” Then, with a sudden change of manner, he laid his
hand on his friend’s shoulder. “Look here, Mr. Copperdock,”
he said earnestly, “get out of your head all idea
that the police have any suspicions of you or your son. I
can assure you that they have not, and that your
straightforwardness in going to them and telling them all you
know has impressed them greatly in your favour.”</p>

<p>“Thank God for that!” exclaimed the tobacconist
fervently. “I’ve been terrible worried these last few days.
I’ve laid awake at nights and puzzled over it all again and
again. I’ve even given up going to the Cambridge Arms of
an evening. I sort of feel that the fellows there don’t talk
to me quite in the way they did.”</p>

<p>“Oh, nonsense!” exclaimed Mr. Ludgrove. “You
mustn’t let this prey on your mind. We all know as well
as you do that you have done nothing to reproach
yourself with. Now I must ask you to excuse me, for I think
I hear a customer in the shop.”</p>

<p>As the days went by, and no further developments took
place, Mr. Copperdock’s face regained its accustomed
cheerfulness, and he resumed his visits to the Cambridge
Arms. The newspapers found fresh sensations with which
to fill their columns, and even Praed Street, in the stimulus
to trade furnished by the approach of Christmas, began
to forget the strange occurrences of which it had been
the scene. Ted Copperdock developed a new smartness
of appearance and carefulness of speech, no doubt the
results of his frequent enjoyment of Ivy’s company. It
was only natural that on Sundays, when the young people
were out at the Pictures, Mr. Copperdock should walk
over to Lisson Grove to console Mrs. Tovey’s loneliness.
Only Mr. Ludgrove, as he regretfully explained to his
friends, found himself too busy to spend one of those
week-ends in the country which he so much enjoyed.</p>

<p>Indeed, it was not until the week-end before Christmas
that he found an opportunity for leaving the shop
for more than an hour or two at a time. He confided
his intentions to Mr. Copperdock on the Friday. “I have
just heard that a plant of which I have long been in
search is to be discovered in a spot not far from
Wokingham,” he said. “The nearest Inn appears to be at a
village called Penderworth. I propose to go there to-morrow
and spend the afternoon and Sunday searching for the
herb. As I mean to come up by an early train on
Monday, I have taken the liberty of telling Mrs. Cooper, who
comes in every week-day to tidy my place up, that I have
left the key with you. I suppose that it is no use asking
you to come with me?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock fidgeted uncomfortably. “Leave the
key by all means,” he replied heartily. “I’ll look after
it for you. Sorry I can’t come with you, but you see about
Christmas time I—we—there’s a lot of folk comes to
the shop and I can’t very well leave Ted alone.”</p>

<p>“I quite understand,” said Mr. Ludgrove, without a
smile. “I shall leave Waterloo at 1.30 to-morrow, and
reach that station again just before ten on Monday. If
Mrs. Cooper has finished before then, she will bring you
back the key.”</p>

<p>His arrangements thus made, the herbalist closed his
shop at noon on Saturday, and, equipped with a suit-case
which he always took with him, took the Tube to
Waterloo station. On arrival at Wokingham, he hired a car to
drive him to the Cross Keys at Penderworth. It was after
three o’clock when he arrived, and after securing a room,
writing his name and address in the register, and
arranging for some supper to be ready for him at half-past seven,
he went out again immediately, a haversack slung over
his shoulder, and an ordnance map in his hand.</p>

<p>It was after seven when he returned, his boots covered
with mud, and his haversack bulging with a miscellaneous
collection of plants. A fine drizzle had come on during the
afternoon, and he was very wet. But trifles like these
never dampened his spirits, and he made remarkable
headway with the cold beef and pickles produced for his
delectation. His meal over, he made his way to the smoking-room
fire, and, spreading a newspaper on the table, began
to examine the contents of his haversack.</p>

<p>The rain, which by this time was falling steadily, seemed
to have kept the regular customers of the Cross Keys at
home. The smoking-room was empty, but for Mr. Ludgrove;
and the landlord, after leaning idly against the bar
at one end of the room, and staring inquisitively at his
solitary guest, could restrain his curiosity no longer.
Lifting the flap, he walked across the room, with the ostensible
object of making up the fire.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove looked up at his approach. “Good
evening,” he said pleasantly.</p>

<p>“Good evening, sir,” replied the landlord, glancing at
the plants laid out on the newspaper. “You’ve been having
a walk round the country this afternoon, then.”</p>

<p>“Yes, and a very pleasant country it is for one of my
interests,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “I have secured several
very interesting specimens, and I hope to find others
to-morrow.”</p>

<p>“Ah!” exclaimed the landlord. “Flowers and that aren’t
much in my line. I’ve got a bit of garden, but it’s mostly
vegetables. Pity the rain came on like it did.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I don’t mind the rain,” replied Mr. Ludgrove.
“Walking about the country as I do, I am compelled to
take the weather as it comes. I can only get away from
London during the week-ends.”</p>

<p>“I see you come from London by what you wrote in
the book,” said the landlord slowly. “It’s Praed Street you
lives in, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. The eagerness in the landlord’s
voice was very transparent. “Won’t you sit down and have
a drink with me?” he said. “Yes, I live in Praed Street.
Perhaps you saw in the paper that we had some very
unusual happenings there a few weeks ago.”</p>

<p>“I did, sir, and it was seeing you came from there made
me think of them,” replied the landlord. He went back to
the bar and got the drinks, which he brought to the fire.
It immediately appeared that his interest in crime, as
reported in the newspapers, was at least as keen as that of
the late Mr. Tovey. But never before had it been his
fortune to meet one who had personally known the victims
of two unsolved murders.</p>

<p>“It’s a queer thing,” he said, “but a couple of days or
so before this Mr. Tovey was murdered, I was polishing
the glasses behind the bar in this very room, when I looked
out of the window and sees a sailor, big chap he was,
walking past. I didn’t rightly catch sight of his face, but he
was carrying a bag and going towards London. Looked as
if he was on the tramp, I thought. I never thought about
it again till I sees the police advertising for this sailor
chap, then, of course, I tells the constable at the Police
Station up the village. I never heard whether they traced
him or not.”</p>

<p>“You didn’t notice if he had a black beard or a scar?”
suggested Mr. Ludgrove mildly.</p>

<p>“No, I didn’t see his face,” replied the landlord, with an
air of a man brushing aside an irrelevant detail. “But
that’s just like the police. You give ’em a bit of valuable
information, and they hardly ever says thank you for it.”</p>

<p>The landlord, warming to his work, and finding Mr.
Ludgrove an excellent listener, developed theory after
theory, each more far-fetched than the last. It was not
until the clock pointed to closing time, that he rose from his
chair with evident reluctance. “You mark my words,
there’s more in it than meets the eye,” he said darkly, as
he leant over the table, “as my old dad, what kept this
house afore I did, used to say, if there’s anything you
can’t rightly understand, there’s bound to be a woman in
it. Look at the things what you sees in the papers every
week. How do you know that these two poor chaps as
were killed wasn’t both running after the same woman?
And if she was married couldn’t ’er ’usband tell you
something about why they was murdered? You think it over,
sir, when you gets back to London.”</p>

<p>And the landlord, nodding his head with an air of
superlative wisdom, disappeared in the direction of the
tap-room. By the time he returned, Mr. Ludgrove had
collected his belongings and retired to bed.</p>

<p>By the following morning the rain had ceased, and Mr.
Ludgrove was enabled to pursue his explorations in
comfort. He went out directly after breakfast and returned to
the Inn in time for lunch. In the afternoon he followed a
different direction, arriving back shortly after dark. When
he repaired to the smoking-room after supper, he found
that his fame as a personal acquaintance of the murdered
men had preceded him. Mr. Ludgrove was before all
things a student of human nature, and he seemed almost
to enjoy taking part with the leading men of Penderworth
in an interminable discussion of the unsolved crimes.
Perhaps he reflected that the looker-on sees most of the game,
and that these men, viewing the circumstances from a
distance, might have hit upon some point in the evidence
which had escaped the observers on the spot.</p>

<p>At all events, he went to bed on Sunday night with the
remark that he had thoroughly enjoyed his visit to
Penderworth. A car had been ordered to take him to
Wokingham station early on Monday morning. His first act upon
reaching the platform was to buy a paper and open it.
Across the top of the centre page lay spread the ominous
headline:</p>

<p class="headline">Another tragedy in Praed Street</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch06">

<h2>Chapter VI. <br/> A Middle-aged Poet</h2>

<p>Mr. Richard Pargent’s public was a very limited one.
A few lines of type, of unequal length, would appear from
time to time in one of the ultra-artistic magazines, and
would be hailed by critics of the new school as yet another
deadly blow at the shackles which have hitherto fettered
the feet of the muse of poetry. The general public found
them incomprehensible, which was perhaps a fortunate
circumstance for Mr. Pargent’s reputation.</p>

<p>But, in spite of Mr. Pargent’s extreme literary modernity,
his surroundings and circumstances were typically
mid-Victorian. His age was between fifty and sixty, and he
lived with his sister Clara in a tall, narrow house in
Bavaria Square, Bayswater. It was, as a matter of fact, the
house in which he and his two sisters had been born. On
their parents’ death he and Miss Clara Pargent had elected
to remain where they were and keep house together. Miss
Margaret, younger and more adventurous, had taken unto
herself a companion—of the female sex—and migrated to
a house in the little town of West Laverhurst, in Wiltshire.</p>

<p>It will be gathered from this that the Pargent family
were not dependent upon Mr. Richard Pargent’s literary
earnings. Each member of it was comparatively well off,
and lived according to the standards of mid-Victorian
comfort. In their own phrase, they knew quite a number
of nice people, and sometimes they found it difficult to
make time in which to perform all their social duties. As a
consequence, they had little opportunity left for doing
anything useful.</p>

<p>Although many years had elapsed since Miss Margaret
had shaken the dust of Bayswater off her feet and retired
to the intellectual wilderness of West Laverhurst, her
brother and sister had never completely recovered from
the shock of such a revolutionary proceeding. Never
before, within the memory of man, had any member of the
Pargent family done anything but what was expected of
them. And even now, when any of their friends asked after
Miss Margaret, they replied with an almost imperceptible
hesitation, with the apologetic smile we adopt when
speaking of anyone who exhibits such remarkable eccentricity.</p>

<p>Not that Miss Margaret’s departure had entirely broken
the bonds which united the family. She and Miss Clara
exchanged letters every day, although it must exceed the
comprehension of ordinary mortals what they found to
write about. Further than this, West Laverhurst was the
object of a regular fortnightly pilgrimage on the part of
Richard Pargent. Every other Saturday he caught the
10:45 at Paddington, which reached West Laverhurst at
12:25, giving him ample time to lunch with his sister and
catch the 3.10 up, which deposited him at Paddington at
4.55. Miss Clara always had tea ready for him in the
drawing-room in Bavaria Square. A No. 15 bus from
Paddington took him almost to his door.</p>

<p>The Saturday before Christmas happened to be the occasion
for one of these fortnightly visits. It was usual for
Mr. Pargent to walk the short half mile which separated
West Laverhurst from his sister’s house, but, the afternoon
being wet and Mr. Pargent very careful of his health, he
asked Miss Margaret to requisition a car to drive him to
the station. He arrived there in plenty of time, and in due
course the 3.10 came in punctually. Mr. Pargent took a
corner seat in a first-class non-smoking carriage, and
immediately became immersed in a book which he had
brought with him for the purpose of reading in the train.
He inwardly congratulated himself upon having secured
a seat in an empty carriage.</p>

<p>The 3.10 up from West Laverhurst stops twice before
reaching Reading, and then runs fast up to London. The
stop at Reading is a somewhat long one, owing to the fact
that tickets are collected there. On this particular
afternoon, the train had run into the station a minute or two
before time, and the stop was even longer than usual, giving
a tall man in a rather tight-fitting overcoat ample time to
walk leisurely the whole length of the train and select an
empty first-class smoking carriage close to the engine. The
train started at last, Mr. Pargent being left in undisputed
possession of his compartment.</p>

<p>The train arrived at Paddington punctually at five
minutes to five. Mr. Pargent had observed that the rain was
falling more heavily than ever, but, from his long
experience of Paddington station, he knew how to reach the
stopping place of the No. 15 bus, keeping under cover
nearly all the way. He had only to follow the subway
which leads to the Underground booking-office, and then
climb the stairway which leads into Praed Street. The No.
15 bus stops nearly opposite on the further side of the
street.</p>

<p>The passenger who had got in at Reading seemed to
know his way about as well as did Mr. Pargent. This man,
who somehow vaguely suggested a retired ship’s officer,
had an iron-grey beard and a curious patch of crimson,
such as is popularly known as a port-wine mark, on his
left cheek. He walked slowly down the subway, so slowly
that Mr. Pargent overtook him before he reached the
foot of the stairway. The two ascended it together, only a
few steps separating them, Mr. Pargent leading.</p>

<p>The mouth of the stairway was blocked, as it so often
is in wet weather, by a knot of people unfurling their
umbrellas and waiting for an interval in the traffic to dash
across to the refuge in the middle of the road. Mr. Pargent
unfolded his umbrella like the rest, and seizing his
opportunity, ran for the island. The interval was a narrow one;
an almost unceasing stream of buses and taxis was pouring
down Praed Street. Only two or three followed Mr.
Pargent’s example, among them the Reading passenger. In
the blinding rain and the flurry of the traffic nobody
noticed a swift movement of the latter’s arm, nor did they
watch him as he left the refuge immediately and gained the
far side of the road.</p>

<p>The clock above the entrance of the station showed it to
be exactly five o’clock. The Reading passenger glanced at
it, walked swiftly a few yards westward up Praed Street,
then, seizing his opportunity, crossed the road again. This
brought him to the slope leading to the departure platform
of Paddington station. He hurried through the booking
office on to No. 1 platform, at which stood the 5.5 train
for Bristol, which stops for the first time at Reading. He
showed the ticket collector a third-class single ticket for
Reading, and the man hastily opened a carriage door and
pushed him in. “Near shave that, sir!” he remarked.</p>

<p>The passenger was far too short of breath to do anything
but nod his head in reply. He sank down exhausted
upon the seat as the guard blew his whistle and the train
drew out of the station. There were only two men beside
himself in the carriage, and they, with true British
indifference, took no further notice of him. The train had nearly
reached Reading when he walked down the corridor to the
lavatory. He did not return to the carriage, but stepped
Straight from the corridor to the platform as the train
came to rest. He mingled unnoticed with the stream
passing the barriers. He noticed that the hands of the clock
pointed to ten minutes to six.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Mr. Pargent had stood for an instant upon
the refuge in the middle of Praed Street, a puzzled
expression on his face. An approaching taxi-driver noticed his
swaying form and swerved sharply, just in time to avoid
him as he crashed forward into the road-way. The taxi-driver’s
action caused a sudden check to the traffic, and for
an instant there was a chaos of skidding vehicles,
screeching brakes, and blasphemous language. Then the nearest
drivers jumped from their seats and clustered round the
prone form. A majestic policeman, setting a calm and
undeviating course through the tumult, knelt down and
turned the body over. Mr. Pargent was dead.</p>

<p>The newspaper which Mr. Ludgrove bought at Wokingham
station and read carefully during his journey to
Waterloo contained nothing more than a bare statement
that the famous poet, Richard Pargent, had fallen dead in
Praed Street, and that, upon the body being conveyed to
the mortuary, a blade was found in it, with the point
entering the heart. Round these facts a formidable structure
of conjecture and reminiscence was built up. There was an
obituary notice, in which Mr. Pargent’s Christian names
and the titles of his published works were incorrectly
stated. There was a résumé of the case of Mr. Tovey, and
a photograph of Praed Street, with heavy black crosses
marking the places where the murders had taken place.
Finally there was a leading article, in which the
responsibility for the murders was ingeniously fixed upon the
Government, which in consequence came in for severe
criticism. In fact, the murder of Mr. Pargent was evidently
the topic of the day.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove sat with his haversack beside him on the
carriage seat, even his beloved plants unheeded. He read
every bit of the paper over and over again, seeking for
some clue which might account for the crime. The description
ended with the words “the police are, however, in possession
of a clue, the nature of which they are not at present
prepared to divulge, but which, they are confident, will
lead to startling developments in the near future.” Mr.
Ludgrove smiled rather cynically as he read them. They
seemed to him to have a somewhat familiar ring.</p>

<p>He had the paper in his hand as he walked into Mr.
Copperdock’s shop to get his key, and his friend caught
sight of it. “So you’ve seen the news, then?” he said
excitedly.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded gravely. “I have been reading the
account as I came up in the train,” he replied.</p>

<p>“We didn’t know a thing about it till eight o’clock on
Saturday evening,” continued Mr. Copperdock eagerly.
“I was just going across to the Cambridge Arms when
Inspector Whyland came in and asked me casual-like what
I’d been doing all the afternoon. As a matter of fact
neither Ted nor I had hardly left the shop, and so I told
him. It wasn’t till then that he let on that three hours
before a gentleman had been murdered not a hundred yards
away, exactly the same as poor Tovey. Then I remembered
that a customer had told me something about an
accident outside Paddington station, but, being busy, I
hadn’t taken any heed of it. And, that reminds me, the
Inspector left a message for you, asking if you would
let him know when you got back. I’ll ring him up from
here if you like, I’ve got his number.”</p>

<p>“I wish you would, I have no telephone, as you know,”
replied Mr. Ludgrove. “Has Mrs. Cooper brought my key
back yet?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock felt in his pocket and handed the
herbalist a Yale key. “She brought it in ten minutes ago. She
was terribly upset, and talked about our all being
murdered in our beds next. It’s a terrible thing to have
happened just before Christmas like this. People will be afraid
to go out of doors after dark.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded rather absently, and took the key
which his friend offered him. “You’ll let Inspector
Whyland know I’m back?” he said, and, without awaiting Mr.
Copperdock’s reply, he left the shop, crossed the road, and
entered his own premises, a thoughtful frown upon his
face.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland lost no time in acting upon Mr.
Copperdock’s message. The murder of Mr. Richard
Pargent, following so soon upon that of Mr. Tovey, and
perpetrated by the same method, had made a great
sensation, not only among the public, but, which was far more
important to the Inspector, at Headquarters. He had been
given a pretty direct hint that unless he could find some
clue within the next few days, the case would be taken out
of his hands and given to some more capable officer. All
the machinery at the disposal of the police had been put
into action, but so far without the slightest result. And in
Inspector Whyland’s despair it seemed to him that the
only hope left of gaining any information was through the
herbalist, with his peculiar inner knowledge of the
inhabitants of the district.</p>

<p>He arrived to find Mr. Ludgrove busily engaged in
writing up descriptions of his botanical trophies in a large
manuscript book. The herbalist greeted him warmly, and
invited him to a seat in the best chair. The two sat for a
moment in silence, until the Inspector spoke abruptly.</p>

<p>“Look here, Mr. Ludgrove, what do you know about
this man who’s been killed?”</p>

<p>“Richard Pargent?” replied the herbalist quietly. “I
know nothing about him personally. I have seen his name
mentioned once or twice as a writer of verse, but I doubt if
I should have remembered it had it not been recalled to me
by what I read in the papers this morning.”</p>

<p>“Do you know anything about this poetry of his?”
continued the Inspector.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. “I am no judge of poetry,” he
replied. “But I can hardly imagine that it was bad enough
to inspire anyone with a desire to murder him.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland shrugged his shoulders impatiently.
“That’s just it!” he exclaimed. “There doesn’t seem to
have been anything about the man to provide a motive for
his murder. Look here, Mr. Ludgrove, you’re not the sort
of man to go round spinning yarns to your friends. I’ll
make a bargain with you. You get to know all sorts of
things that never come to our ears. Tell me your honest
opinion about these murders, and I’ll tell you what we’ve
found out so far.”</p>

<p>For a moment Mr. Ludgrove made no reply. When at
length he spoke it was with a deep note of earnestness in
his voice. “I am honoured by your confidence, Inspector.
As you have guessed, I have been very much concerned by
these murders. I have feared that they would be traced to
one or other of my clients, some of whom, I regret to say,
have little respect for the law. I know much of the inner
history of Praed Street and its neighbourhood, and I
regret to say that much of it is almost incredibly sordid.
I refer of course to its underworld, and not to its
respectable inhabitants, who are greatly in the majority. But
of two facts I can assure you. The first is that in all my
experience I have never heard of a crime committed by
any of the class to which I refer except for some specific
purpose, either gain or revenge, and the second is that
none of them would resort to murder except perhaps in a
sudden access of passion.”</p>

<p>The Inspector nodded. “That’s very much my own
experience of regular crooks,” he replied. “But you say
you’ve thought a lot about this business. Haven’t you any
theory of your own?”</p>

<p>“The only theory I can form is that the murders are
the work of some irresponsible maniac,” said Mr.
Ludgrove quietly.</p>

<p>“Would an irresponsible maniac have put a piece of
poisoned glass on the end of Colburn’s pipe?” countered
the Inspector quickly. “No, I am afraid that theory won’t
do, Mr. Ludgrove.”</p>

<p>“I think it is the only theory which fits in with the
assumption that these three men were all murdered by the
same hand,” replied the herbalist.</p>

<p>“Yet I don’t think you can get away from that assumption,”
said Inspector Whyland. “I don’t mind telling you
something that worries me a bit, since it’s bound to come
out at the inquest. One of the first things we found when
we searched Pargent’s pockets in the mortuary was this.”</p>

<p>He put his hand in his pocket, then held it out with
extended palm toward Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>The herbalist leant forward with an exclamation of
surprise. “Ah, a white counter with the figure III drawn on it
in red ink!” he exclaimed. “Do you know, Inspector, I
wondered if anything of the kind had been found. That is
really interesting.”</p>

<p>“Interesting!” grumbled the Inspector. “Aye, the
reporters will find it interesting enough, you may bet. We
couldn’t keep it dark, even if we wanted to. This fellow
Pargent got it by post on Saturday morning. He told his
sister, Miss Clara, that it must be a secret token from
some admirer of his work. He was so pleased about it that
he took it down to Penderworth to show his other sister.
It was on his way back from there that he was killed. Oh
yes, it’s interesting enough. We shall have to say that
Tovey and Colburn got counters like this, and then there’ll
be a fearful outcry against us for keeping it dark. ‘Had the
police not displayed this criminal reticence, the victim
would have understood the purport of the warning and
adequate measures could have been taken to protect him.’
Oh yes, I know what’s coming all right.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland gazed savagely at the counter for a
few seconds, then continued abruptly.</p>

<p>“Fortunately the envelope in which this one came had
been kept. The counter was wrapped up in a piece of cheap
writing paper, and put in a square envelope of the same
quality. The address was typewritten. Our people at the
Yard are trying to trace the machine it was done with. I
wish them joy of the job. They can tell the make all right;
but there must be thousands of them scattered through
London.”</p>

<p>“If you don’t mind my suggesting it, it doesn’t follow
that because Mr. Pargent received a counter he was
murdered by the same hand that killed Mr. Tovey or Mr.
Colburn,” said the herbalist quietly.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland glanced at him quickly. “No, it
doesn’t exactly follow,” he agreed. “But we’ll return to
that later. I want to show you something else first. Look
here.”</p>

<p>This time he produced from his pocket a paper packet,
which he proceeded to unroll. From it he withdrew two
sinister-looking blades, each stained a dull brown.</p>

<p>“These are the knives with which Tovey and Pargent
were killed,” he said. “Don’t touch them, but tell me if you
can tell one from the other.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove adjusted his spectacles, and bent over the
knives. They were exactly similar, thin, with an extremely
sharp point, about half an inch wide and eight inches long.
Neither of them showed any sign of having ever possessed
a handle.</p>

<p>“No, I can see no difference between them,” agreed Mr.
Ludgrove. “I admit that they strengthen the supposition
that Mr. Tovey and Mr. Pargent died by the same hand.
But, admitting that this was the case, it only bears out my
theory that the murders were the actions of a maniac. If
they were not, if both men were killed with some
definite motive, you have to discover some connection
between them. Yet they moved in entirely distinct orbits,
and, I should imagine, had nothing whatever in
common.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland shook his head with a tolerant smile.
“Theory’s all very well in its way, Mr. Ludgrove,” he said,
as he replaced the knives in his pocket. “I can’t waste my
time establishing connections. There’s evidence enough
here to convince a jury that the same man killed all three
of them. And I don’t fancy it’ll be very long before I lay
hands upon him.”</p>

<p>“I sincerely hope your expectations will be realized,
Inspector,” replied the herbalist, in a tone of faint irony
which was lost upon Whyland. “I suppose it is indiscreet
to ask whether you have any suspicions? I confess that for
my part I am entirely at a loss. What about young Snyder,
for instance?”</p>

<p>“Master Wal Snyder is out of this,” returned the
Inspector shortly. “He was pinched a week ago for picking
pockets in a tube lift, and is safely under lock and key.
But I don’t mind telling you in confidence, Mr. Ludgrove,
that I know the murderer lives somewhere in this
district.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove lifted his eyebrows in real or assumed
astonishment. “Indeed?” he exclaimed. “That is indeed a
great step forward. Pray, how did you come to that
conclusion?”</p>

<p>If the Inspector perceived the irony in his tone, he paid
no heed to it. “Well, it’s pretty obvious,” he replied. “All
three men were murdered in Praed Street, to begin with.
Then, there’s another thing. The envelope in which the
counter was sent to Pargent bore the post-mark of this
district, London, W.2. You can’t get away from it,
everything points to the murderer living somewhere about
here.”</p>

<p>Again Inspector Whyland paused. Then suddenly he
rose and stood over the herbalist where he sat in his chair.
“There’s another thing, Mr. Ludgrove,” he said, almost
menacingly. “You said just now that it didn’t follow that
because Pargent received a counter he was killed by the
same man that murdered the other two. Do you see where
that leads you? If the third counter was sent by a different
hand, it can only have been sent by one of the very few
who knew of the receipt of the first two. And all of them
live in this district, you will remember.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove gazed up at him in mock alarm. “They
do, indeed,” he replied. “It makes my blood run cold to
think that I am one of them. Really, I am quite relieved to
think that I have an alibi in the case of this last murder,
at least.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland laughed shortly. “Oh, for that
matter, I’m as much under suspicion as you,” he said. “But,
you see, there are some people we know who couldn’t
produce an alibi for the time when any of the murders
were committed.”</p>

<p>And with that he turned abruptly on his heel and strode
out of the room.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch07">

<h2>Chapter VII. <br/> The Black Sailor</h2>

<p>That afternoon Inspector Whyland wrote in his report:
“I had a long interview with Ludgrove. He is a shrewd
fellow, and not easy to get anything out of. I am pretty
sure that he has no definite knowledge on this matter,
but he admits himself that some of his customers are not
above petty crime, and it seems to me that he is the most
likely man to hear any underground rumours that may be
flying about.</p>

<p>“I managed to convey to him a pretty broad hint that
I suspected one of his friends. I did this with a double
motive. On the one hand, if he thinks that Copperdock or
one of the others had anything to do with it, he will
probably pass the hint on, and somebody may try to make a
bolt for it, which would give them away. On the other
hand, if he is convinced of their innocence, he will be all
the more anxious to pass on to me any information he may
get and which may tend to clear them. It is just a chance,
but it may lead to something useful.”</p>

<p>The inspector’s strategy was indeed that of forlorn
hope. Rack his brains as he would, interrogate as he might
everyone who could possibly throw light upon the murder
of Richard Pargent, he found himself up against a stone
wall. Nobody could swear to having seen and recognized
the victim from the time he entered the train at West
Laverhurst until he had been seen to stagger and fall on
the refuge in Praed Street. The ticket collector at Reading
was almost positive about him, but, as he explained, he
saw so many passengers in the course of his day’s work
that he could not be sure of any particular one, unless
there was something very remarkable about him or her.
All he knew for sure was that if this was the gentleman,
he was alone in the carriage when the train left Reading.</p>

<p>Nobody at Paddington had noticed him among the
streams flowing from the arrival platforms, and it was
impossible to establish whether or not he had left the
station alone. The taxi-driver who had seen him fall had
not seen the blow struck, could not even say whether
anyone else had been standing on the refuge with him or
not. It was a nasty, skiddy evening, and dark at that. He
had enough to do to watch the traffic without worrying
about people on refuges. It wasn’t until he had seen the
poor man stagger into the road almost under his front
wheels that he had even noticed him. And then his
attention was fully occupied in pulling up and trying to avoid
collisions.</p>

<p>Finally, neither of the Miss Pargents could throw the
faintest glimmer of light upon the affair. Their brother
was not the type of man to have secrets from his family.
Both sisters appeared to know the inner history of every
moment of his life since infancy, and insisted upon
dispensing the knowledge at great length. As to his having
an enemy in the world, the thing was absurd. He was a
very retiring man, who lived only for his work, and had
never sought adventure beyond the narrow bounds of the
family circle. Inspector Whyland came away from his
last interview with the sisters—for Miss Margaret had
been prevailed upon to come up to London—convinced
that it would have been impossible for the dead man to
have embarked upon any clandestine enterprise without
the knowledge of one or other of them.</p>

<p>He was equally unsuccessful in finding any link between
Richard Pargent and any of the inhabitants of Praed
Street. Their names were utterly unfamiliar to either of
the sisters, and Mr. Pargent’s only connection with Praed
Street appeared to be that he occasionally passed along it
in a bus. Inspector Whyland was convinced that the same
hand that had struck down Mr. Tovey, had killed Richard
Pargent, and probably Mr. Colburn, though the receipt
of the counter was the only link in the latter case. But
what could be the motive for the murder of these three
men, so entirely disconnected from one another? And, if
one adopted the theory of a homicidal maniac, the
difficulty was scarcely diminished. Homicidal maniacs either
kill indiscriminately, or, as in the classic case of Jack the
Ripper, they attack a certain class or type. Yet the receipt
of the numbered counters implied some process of definite
selection. Upon what possible grounds could such a
selection be based?</p>

<p>The inquest helped the authorities not at all.
Nothing beyond what Inspector Whyland already knew was
elicited, and the only fresh sensation which it provided
was the disclosure of the fact that each of the three
victims had received a numbered counter. Whyland’s
forecast of the results of this were proved to have been only
slightly exaggerated. Most of the newspapers of the day
following the inquest appeared with leading articles
discussing the wisdom of official secrecy upon such a matter.
A large number of practical jokers despatched counters
bearing the number IV to their friends, many of whom
arrived hot-foot at Scotland Yard demanding instant
police protection. The fatal counter became for the moment
a national symbol. The Opposition newspapers contained
cartoons depicting the Prime Minister opening an envelope
labelled “Public Opinion,” and containing a numbered
counter. An enterprising Insurance Company issued a
poster upon which appeared an enormous representation of
the counter, and under it the words, “You need not fear
this if you are insured with the Gigantic.” To find one in
one’s Christmas pudding was an omen of bad luck for the
ensuing year. Then, having played its part as a nine days’
wonder, the vogue of the numbered counter ceased as
suddenly as it had begun.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, the police had been by no means idle. To
Inspector Whyland it had always seemed that the focus
of the whole business had lain in Mr. Copperdock’s shop.
Mr. Copperdock had been an intimate friend of Mr.
Tovey’s; Ted Copperdock was on familiar terms with
Dick Colburn. It had been through Mr. Copperdock that
he had first learned of the receipt of the numbered
counters; the pipe which had been responsible for Mr. Colburn’s
death been bought at Mr. Copperdock’s shop. Inspector
Whyland began to regard the three victims as represented
by the extremities of the letter Y, which, although they are
not connected to one another, are each connected to a
central point. But Mr. Copperdock was the central point,
this graphic representation was incomplete until the
connection between Richard Pargent and Mr. Copperdock
could be established. And, try as he would, Inspector
Whyland could find absolutely no link between the two.</p>

<p>Nevertheless, Whyland determined to make a very
thorough investigation into Mr. Copperdock’s habits and
associates. He was rewarded by the discovery of two very
interesting facts. A representative of Scotland Yard,
announcing himself as an agent of the Planet Typewriter
Company, the manufacturers of the machine owned by
Mr. Copperdock, and used by his son for writing business
letters, called at the tobacconist’s shop, ostensibly for the
purpose of inspecting the machine. He succeeded in
carrying away with him a specimen of its work, which was
submitted to experts. They reported that, although there were
no perceptible peculiarities in any of the letters which
would enable them to identify this specimen with the
address on the envelope sent to Richard Pargent, there was,
on the other hand no discrepancy between the two types,
and that therefore the envelope might well have been
typed on Mr. Copperdock’s machine.</p>

<p>This, though disappointingly inconclusive, was to
Whyland’s ideas a point to be remembered should any
corroborative evidence come to light. Among the circle in
whose actions he found himself interested, the
Copperdocks were the only people who possessed a typewriter
at all. As a matter of fact, Mr. Copperdock had only
purchased it quite recently, at the instance of Ted, who while
stoutly maintaining that no respectable tradesman could
be without one, had been suspected by his shrewd father
of less disinterested motives. Certainly it had seemed only
natural that, the machine once purchased, the expert Ivy
should come in of an evening and show Ted how to work
it; but Mr. Copperdock had a way of winking at his son
behind her back which made that ingenuous youth blush
most embarrassingly.</p>

<p>The second curious fact was discovered by Inspector
Whyland almost by accident. In his study of Mr.
Copperdock and his associates, he had taken to frequenting the
saloon bar of the Cambridge Arms, carefully choosing such
times as Mr. Copperdock was busy in the shop. There was
nothing in any way suspicious about the Cambridge Arms;
it lay in one of the streets which run southwards from
Praed Street, and was consequently almost hidden in a
backwater. Its remarkably cosy little saloon bar was
patronized chiefly by the neighbouring small tradesmen,
and its habitués were all well-known to the proprietor,
with whom Whyland soon became on confidential terms.</p>

<p>A couple of days after the inquest on Richard Pargent,
Whyland turned into the Cambridge Arms just as its
doors were opened, at five o’clock. The proprietor met him
with a smile, and, having executed his order, leant over
the bar and entered into conversation.</p>

<p>“I never thought, when I opened up last Saturday, that
that poor fellow was being murdered at that very minute,”
he began. “Just about five o’clock, wasn’t it, sir?”</p>

<p>Whyland nodded. “The clock was striking five as they
picked him up,” he replied.</p>

<p>“I remember the evening well,” continued the
proprietor. “Though it wasn’t until nigh upon seven that I heard
anything about it. I says to my wife it was that wet and
foggy that even our regulars wouldn’t be in till later. But
there you are, you never can tell. I hadn’t opened this bar,
not more than five minutes, when in comes one of my best
customers, Sam Copperdock, the tobacconist. You may
have met him here, sir?”</p>

<p>Whyland nodded non-committally, and the landlord
proceeded.</p>

<p>“I was a bit surprised to see him, sir, because Sam
doesn’t usually come along until eight, unless it happens
to be Thursday, when he closes early. ‘Hullo, Sam, you’re
on time to-night,’ I says, jocular like. ‘Oh, I’ve only come
in for a drink,’ he says; ‘The bottle’s empty at home, and I
couldn’t scrounge one from old Ludgrove opposite, he’s
away.’ He has a double, and goes back to his shop. The
bar was pretty nigh empty till about seven, when a fellow
comes in and tells me about the murder.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland deftly turned the conversation. He
knew that if he questioned the man his suspicions would be
aroused, and this he was anxious to avoid. Without any
appearance of haste he finished his drink and left the
premises. Once round the corner, he walked swiftly to the
spot where Richard Pargent had been murdered, counting
his paces as he went.</p>

<p>Could Mr. Copperdock have committed the murder?
It was quite possible. If he had left his shop a few minutes
before five, he would have had plenty of time to reach the
exit from Paddington station, plunge the knife into his
victim, and be at the Cambridge Arms at five minutes
past. But, if he were the criminal, a thousand puzzling
questions presented themselves. How did he know that his
victim would be arriving at Paddington at 4.55 that
evening? Above all, why should Mr. Copperdock, the
tobacconist, have any grudge against Mr. Pargent, the minor
poet? And then again, Whyland was convinced that the
murderer of Richard Pargent had been the murderer of
James Tovey. But, at the moment when Tovey had been
killed, Mr. Copperdock was in his sitting-room with his
son and the murdered man’s daughter. The riddle
appeared to be insoluble.</p>

<p>Whyland turned abruptly, boarded a bus, and took a
ticket to Oxford Circus. Here he dismounted, and turned
into the first picture-house which presented itself. He had
discovered long ago that this was the surest way of
securing freedom from interruption. Here for a couple of hours
he sat motionless, neither seeing the pictures nor attentive
to the strenuous efforts of the orchestra. And as he sat,
a new theory slowly unfolded itself in his brain.</p>

<p>Samuel Copperdock, whom he had studied so carefully,
did not appear to him to be a deliberate criminal. He was
not of the type which harbours revenge, and he did not
seem either clever or painstaking enough to work out the
details of a premeditated murder. Although, if it were true
that he had formed a design to marry Mrs. Tovey, the
murder of Mr. Tovey might be said to be advantageous
to him, it was inconceivable that he had had any hand in
it. He could not have struck the blow himself, and, since
he was not a rich man, it was difficult to see what
inducement he could offer to a hired assassin. In all human
probability, Mr. Copperdock was innocent of the murder
of James Tovey.</p>

<p>But, on the other hand, this murder, followed so closely
by the mysterious death of his other acquaintance,
Colburn, had made a great impression upon him. He had
thought and talked of little else, and, as it happened,
he had known every detail. He had seen the knife with
which James Tovey had been killed; he, in common with
very few others, had known of the receipt of the marked
counters. Suppose that the crimes had had such a powerful
effect upon his imagination that he had felt an irresistible
impulse to imitate them? Such things were known, were
in fact a commonplace of the criminal psychologists.</p>

<p>Upon this assumption, the rest was easy. Mr.
Copperdock had learnt by some accident that this man Richard
Pargent would arrive at Paddington at 4.55 on
Saturday, and had selected him as a likely victim. His imitative
faculty fully developed, he had sent him the numbered
counter, and had purchased a knife similar to the one
which he had already seen. Then, just before the train was
due, he had left his shop, met his victim, committed the
crime, had a drink to steady his nerves, and then come
home.</p>

<p>The theory was plausible, but Inspector Whyland knew
well enough that so far he had not a fragment of real
evidence with which to support it. But, unless he were to
adopt the suggestion of Mr. Ludgrove, that some homicidal
maniac was responsible, Whyland could see no
alternative. The lack of motive was so extraordinarily puzzling.
The murders had been utterly purposeless, and the only
possible theory could be one which took full account of
this fact. And then again, how account for the despatch of
the numbered counters? If the murders had been inspired
by irresponsible impulse, what had been their object?</p>

<p>Still deep in thought, Inspector Whyland left the
picture-house and walked slowly back to the police station
through the less frequented streets. It was a little past
eight on a typical December evening, with a light wet
mist which magnified the outlines of the passers-by and
covered the pavements with a shining dampness. But the
weather never had much effect upon Whyland, and,
beyond a passing reflection that on such an evening murder
in the streets of London was not, after all, an enterprise
presenting any great difficulties to a determined man, he
paid no great attention to it.</p>

<p>He reached the police station without adventure,
ordered a modest supper, and sat down to deal with the
mass of reports which awaited him. He was thus engaged
when a sergeant entered the room, with the message that
a man giving the name of Copperdock wished to speak to
him on the telephone. He rose, walked to the instrument,
and picked up the receiver. “Inspector Whyland
speaking,” he said coldly.</p>

<p>“Is that you, Inspector?” came an excited voice, which
Whyland recognized at once. “Can you come and see me
at once? I’ve something very important to tell you.”</p>

<p>Whyland hesitated for a moment. Whatever it was that
Mr. Copperdock had to say to him, a visit to his house
could afford him an excellent opportunity for keeping his
eyes open for some clue in support of his theory. “Yes,
I’ll come along straight away,” he replied. With a word
to the sergeant, he left the station and walked rapidly
to Praed Street.</p>

<p>It was about a quarter to ten when he arrived and
rang the bell outside Mr. Copperdock’s shop. The
tobacconist was obviously awaiting him, and the door was
opened immediately. With a brief word of greeting, Mr.
Copperdock led the way upstairs to the sitting-room.
Then, shutting the door carefully behind him, he turned
dramatically, “I’ve seen that there black sailor!” he
exclaimed in a hoarse whisper.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland looked at him sharply. When the
reward had originally been offered, he had been
overwhelmed by a flood of people who had claimed to have
seen the “black sailor,” but of late this elusive figure had
ceased to occupy the popular imagination. Was this
a vindication of his theory, showing that Mr.
Copperdock’s brain was completely under the influence of the
crime?</p>

<p>“You have seen the black sailor? Sit down and tell me
all about it, Mr. Copperdock,” he replied gravely.</p>

<p>But Mr. Copperdock was far too excited to sit down.
“I see him plain as I see you now,” he exclaimed. “Just
after I left the Cambridge Arms——”</p>

<p>But Inspector Whyland put out his hand and forced
him gently into the nearest chair. “Now, look here, Mr.
Copperdock, if your information is to be of any use to
me, you must tell it to me in the proper order. Begin
by telling me how you spent the evening.”</p>

<p>“Soon as I shut up shop at eight o’clock, I goes off
to the Cambridge, same as I always does,” replied the
tobacconist protestingly. “Ted went out too, he’s taking
Ivy to the pictures, and they won’t be back for an hour
or so yet. I has a couple there, sitting in front of the
fire, and it wasn’t until nigh on closing time that I left.
There wasn’t anybody there as was coming home my
way, so I starts off home alone. And I hadn’t gone more
than a hundred yards when I runs slap into the black
sailor!”</p>

<p>“What do you mean when you say you ran into him?”
interrupted Whyland.</p>

<p>“Just what I says. I saw someone come round the
corner, and before I could move we ran into one another.
He was a great big fellow, and I could see him perfectly
plain, we was right under the lamp. He bent down and
looked straight at me, and you could have knocked me
down with a feather. It was the black sailor, all right. He
was muffled up in a great heavy coat, but I could see his
beard, and his woollen cap, and a great red scar down the
right side of his face. He glared at me as though he were
going to hit me, and I hollered out, being sure he was
going to do me in. Then all at once he turns his back and
walks off at a tremendous pace. After a bit I follows him,
hoping to meet a copper. But he suddenly turns in to the
Edgware Road, and by the time I gets there I’d lost him.”</p>

<p>“H’m,” said Inspector Whyland. “That must have been
nearly an hour ago now.” He paused for a moment, then,
realizing that in Mr. Copperdock’s present excited state
it would be impossible to get anything coherent out of
him, he rose and took his leave.</p>

<p>“Well, good night, Mr. Copperdock,” he said abruptly.
“It’s a pity you didn’t catch your man. I’d better get back
to the station and warn my people to look out for him.”</p>

<p>As he left the shop, he noticed that Mr. Ludgrove’s door
stood open, and as he crossed the road, the herbalist
himself appeared in the entrance. “Good evening, Inspector,”
he said politely.</p>

<p>Obeying a sudden impulse, Whyland stopped and
returned the greeting. “Good evening, Mr. Ludgrove,” he
replied. “May I come in for a moment?”</p>

<p>“By all means, come along,” replied the herbalist,
leading the way into his sanctum. “I do not drink much
myself, but perhaps you will take some refreshment
yourself?”</p>

<p>He busied himself with a bottle and a glass, while the
Inspector drew up a chair to the blazing fire. Then, when
his host had seated himself, Whyland glanced at him with
a slight smile playing about his lips.</p>

<p>“Our friend Mr. Copperdock has seen the black sailor,”
he remarked.</p>

<p>“Seen the black sailor!” exclaimed the herbalist
incredulously. “When and where—if I may ask?”</p>

<p>“Listen, and I’ll tell you all about it,” replied
Whyland. “About an hour ago outside the Cambridge Arms.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove laughed softly at something in the tone
of the Inspector’s voice, then suddenly became serious.</p>

<p>“I do not think that I should place too great importance
upon this incident,” he said. “Mr. Copperdock is a most
excellent person, and I have the greatest respect for him.
But I have often suspected that his visits to the
Cambridge Arms have—shall I say, a pernicious effect upon
the accuracy of his observations.”</p>

<p>“He seemed a bit excited, certainly,” replied
Whyland. “But he was quite positive that he had seen the
man.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove shook his head. “Now, this is strictly
between ourselves, Inspector,” he said. “I make an
invariable practice of taking a walk every evening, as soon
as my clients give me the opportunity. This evening I
went out soon after eight, and walked in the direction
of Hyde Park. As it happened, I was returning past the
Cambridge Arms, when I saw a figure which was
unmistakably that of Mr. Copperdock leave the entrance of that
house. I hastened my steps to overtake him, when
suddenly he stopped, shouted, and after a moment or two,
set off in the direction of Edgware Road. I could not
imagine what was the matter, since but for us two the road
was deserted as far as one could see for the mist. I was
within twenty or thirty yards of him, and I certainly saw
no black sailor.”</p>

<p>It was Inspector Whyland’s turn to smile significantly.
“It does not altogether surprise me to learn that Mr.
Copperdock suffers from hallucinations,” he said.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch08">

<h2>Chapter VIII. <br/> At No. 407, Praed Street</h2>

<p>Although the unexplained murders which had taken
place in Praed Street were soon forgotten by the general
public, their shadow hung heavily over the neighbourhood
in which they had been committed. The fact that the
three deaths had taken place within comparatively few
hundred yards of one another could not fail to have its
effect upon the local imagination. A very noticeable
change came over the usual cheerful and careless life
of Praed Street. The evening pavements were no longer
blocked by a strolling, noisy crowd. Women and children
were rarely to be seen abroad after dark. Even men,
traversing the street upon their lawful occasions, had a way
of keeping close to the inner side of the pavements, and
crossing the road upon the approach of any unfamiliar
form.</p>

<p>Christmas passed in this atmosphere of intangible fear;
the old year died and the new year came in with a
welcome spell of clear and frosty weather. But, in spite of the
fact that no further tragedies occurred, the shadow still lay
heavily upon the district. Ludgrove, listening to the
whispered and entangled stories of his clients, became more
and more certain that, even in the hidden depths of the
underworld, there was no knowledge of the agency by
which the crimes had been committed.</p>

<p>Had such knowledge existed, it must inevitably have
been divulged to him. The police, under the direction
of Inspector Whyland, were engaged in passing a
fine-toothed comb through the Paddington district, and the
minor offenders disturbed in this process were as
concerned as a colony of ants unearthed by a spade. Mr.
Ludgrove was visited furtively late at night by anxious
people seeking advice how to conceal the evidence of their
misdemeanours from the prying eyes of the police. He
questioned each of these closely, but the more he did so
the more he became convinced that none of them had the
slightest inkling of the perpetrator of the murders.</p>

<p>Another section of his clients, however, equally furtive
and mysterious, had clues in plenty, which they seemed
to think entitled them to some reward. These, after
assuring themselves that no one could overhear them, would
produce an incoherent story of how one of their
neighbours must be the criminal. He had been heard to utter
threats that he would do some one in some day, he had
been in Praed Street on the night when Mr. Tovey was
murdered, in the neighbourhood of Paddington station
when Mr. Pargent was killed. Others, again, had met a
muffled figure brandishing a knife, or had seen a dark man
with a beard standing in the shadow thrown by a
projecting wall. Two or three searching questions were always
sufficient to prove that their suspicions were baseless.</p>

<p>The murders in Praed Street were thus peculiar in the
annals of crime. In nearly every case of a crime being
committed, there are others besides the criminal who know
all the facts. The police know this, but their great
difficulty is to secure evidence sufficiently convincing to lead
to a conviction. There is a certain <i>esprit de corps</i> in the
constant strife between the professional criminal and the
police, and those who know are careful to keep their
knowledge to themselves. But in this case, had there been
any of the inhabitants of the district in the secret, Mr.
Ludgrove would have obtained some hint of it. It seemed
conclusive that the criminal was either working alone and
independently, or came from some other district.</p>

<p>This was the state of affairs towards the end of
January. The police were completely baffled; Inspector
Whyland, although he still favoured the theory he had evolved
in the picture-house, had failed to find any evidence upon
which he could act. He hardly knew whether to attribute
Mr. Copperdock’s story of his meeting with the black
sailor to pure hallucination, or to an attempt to divert
suspicion from himself. In either case, it could be made to
fit in with the theory that he had murdered Richard
Pargent under the influence of what the psychologists called
an imitative complex. Whyland redoubled his activities,
and a most accurate watch was kept upon Mr.
Copperdock’s movements. A month had elapsed since the murder
of Richard Pargent when Mr. Jacob Martin, the
prosperous wine merchant of the Barbican, opening his
morning post in his comfortable office, came upon a typewritten
envelope, marked “Private and Confidential.” He ripped
it open with the paper cutter which lay upon his desk, and
unfolded the letter it contained. It also was typewritten,
on plain paper. Only the signature “John Lacey” was
in ink.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin, a portly, grey-haired man of between fifty
and sixty, read the letter through twice, with a gathering
frown upon his face. He had prospered exceedingly since
the day when he had first set up in business for himself as
a wine merchant, so much so that his competitors
wondered at his success. There had, from time to time been
rumours, quickly suppressed, to the effect that Mr.
Martin had other means of livelihood than his ostensible
business. But Mr. Martin was a remarkably astute man, and
had hitherto managed to avoid undue inquisitiveness.</p>

<p>And now, like a bolt from the blue, came this
extraordinary letter. Confound John Lacey, and his prying habits,
whoever he might be. That little cellar under the back
office! How well he remembered it. It had been the scene
of many most profitable transactions, had harboured
treasures for which the police of two continents had
searched in vain. For Mr. Martin was a receiver of stolen
goods, not a mere general practitioner of the art, but a
specialist whose services were utilized only by the
aristocracy of thieves, and whose particular function was turning
into cash only the most valuable jewellery.</p>

<p>With an exclamation of annoyance Mr. Martin turned
once more to the letter. “Dear Sir, I venture to address
you upon a subject which will no doubt interest you,”
it ran. “I have recently acquired a lease of the premises
No. 407, Praed Street, which I understand, were in your
occupation up till some fifteen years ago. Since you
vacated them, these premises have been occupied by a
clothier, who did not require the extensive cellarage, which
was boarded up. In the course of certain alterations which
I am having made to the premises, the entrance to the
cellars has once again been opened. In the course of my
investigations I have made a most interesting discovery
in the small cellar beneath the back office.</p>

<p>“I should perhaps report this discovery to the
authorities, but I have thought it best to consult you upon the
matter before doing so. This letter should reach you by the
first post to-morrow (Saturday) morning. I should be glad
if you could make it convenient to meet me on the
premises at 2 p.m. that day, when the workmen who are at
present employed there will have gone. I can then show
you my discovery, and we can consult upon the most
suitable steps to be taken in the matter. Should you not
find this convenient, I shall assume that the subject does
not interest you, and shall report the matter forthwith
to the police. Yours faithfully, John Lacey.”</p>

<p>A blackmailing letter, without a doubt, Mr. Martin
could see at a glance. But what on earth could the fellow
have discovered? Fifteen years ago, when Mr. Martin
moved from Praed Street to the Barbican, he had taken
the utmost care to destroy every trace of the purpose to
which that little cellar had been put. He racked his brains
to try and think of anything that could possibly have been
overlooked, but without success. Even those ingeniously
contrived recesses in the walls had been torn out, leaving
nothing but the bare brick. Mr. Martin had done the work
with his own hands, not caring to trust anyone else with
so delicate a matter. Yet, after all, in spite of all his care,
he must have left some clue, which this infernal fellow
Lacey had somehow blundered upon.</p>

<p>He brushed aside as absurd the suggestion that “Lacey”
could conceal the identity of one of those with whom he
had done business, who knew the secret of the cellar and
had adopted this clumsy plan to blackmail him. The circle
of his secret clients was a very narrow one; he knew them
all and was well aware that blackmail was neither in their
line nor in their interest. The expert in acquiring jewellery
concentrated upon his particular art; he did not descend
to blackmail, especially of the one man through whose
agency he was able to dispose of his spoil. No, there was
no doubt about it, a slip had been made, a slip which had
lain undiscovered all these years, through the
circumstance that his successor, the clothier, had found no use
for the cellars and had boarded up the entrance to them.</p>

<p>There was nothing for it but to carry out the suggestion
contained in the letter, and meet the man in Praed Street
at two o’clock. He must find out the nature of this
mysterious discovery, and take steps to ensure that all
evidence of it be securely destroyed. Lacey, of course,
would demand some compensation for holding his tongue.
The sum he demanded would depend upon the importance
of what he had found. Well, they would discuss terms,
alone in that empty house, in the very cellar which Mr.
Martin remembered so well.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin stroked his chin reflectively. What sort of
fellow was this Lacey, he wondered? He himself was a
powerful man, proud of his own powers of intimidation.
It ought to be simple enough for him to destroy the
evidence first then to tell Lacey to go to the devil and do
his worst. He unlocked a drawer of his desk and drew from
it a small automatic pistol, which he slipped into his
pocket. It was with a smile that he remembered that
Praed Street had recently acquired a sinister reputation.
Well, if any accident should happen——</p>

<p>Mr. Martin’s office closed at one o’clock on Saturdays.
He left a few minutes before that hour, having put John
Lacey’s letter in his pocket and examined the mechanism
of his automatic. Then he consumed a hasty lunch at a
chop-house near-by, and walked down the street to
Aldersgate Metropolitan station, where he took a ticket to
Paddington. He emerged into Praed Street at about five
minutes to two, and began to walk along that thoroughfare in
the direction of Number 407.</p>

<p>Praed Street, at this time on a fine afternoon, wore
its usual air of busy activity. The exodus from central
London was still at its height, the crowds still passed along
in bus or taxi towards the portals of Paddington station.
On the other hand, the inhabitants of the neighbourhood,
released from work, were beginning their week-end
shopping. The pavement was crowded, and Mr. Martin, who
had some distance to walk to his destination, looked about
him curiously. Since he had put up his shutters for the
last time, fifteen years ago, he had rarely revisited Praed
Street, and even then he had only traversed it in a taxi,
going to or from Paddington. The street had changed a
little since he had been an inhabitant of it. Certainly there
were fresh names over many of the shops, and, here and
there, there had been alterations to the buildings he
remembered. He glanced at a board on the opposite side of
the street. Elmer Ludgrove. That was new since his day.
The rather musty-looking shop was conspicuous among
its neighbours by being closed. Praed Street, as a rule,
does most of its business on Saturday afternoon.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin walked on a step or two, then hesitated for
an instant. So Sam Copperdock, from whom he bought his
cigarettes in those early days, was still here. Mr. Martin
had long ago abandoned cigarettes for cigars, but he felt
a momentary impulse to go in and renew the old
acquaintance. Sam Copperdock had been a good customer of his,
he remembered. Many a bottle of whiskey had he sold
him. But on second thoughts he refrained. Perhaps it
would be just as well, in the light of what might happen
during the next half hour or so, that his visit to Praed
Street remained unsuspected.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin walked on, and in a few minutes found
himself outside Number 407. It was much as he
remembered it, but that it was lying empty, and showed signs of
being refitted for a new tenant. The windows were
almost obscured with patches of white-wash, but peering
through them he could see trestles, timber, shavings, all
the litter which betrays the presence of the carpenter.
So far, then, the letter was correct. Mr. Martin, after
a furtive glance round about him, walked up to the door
and tried it. It was locked.</p>

<p>He drew out his watch and consulted it. It was nearly
five minutes past two, but he remembered that he had
noticed that morning that it was a trifle fast. Lacey,
whoever he was, would doubtless be along in a moment. Mr.
Martin hoped he would be quick; he had no wish to be
recognized outside the premises by any of his old
acquaintances. A sudden thought struck him. Perhaps Lacey
was already inside, waiting for him. There was an electric
bellpush by the side of the door. Mr. Martin pressed it
firmly, but could hear no answering ring above the roar
of the traffic. Then all at once he became aware that a
small girl was standing by his side, looking up at him with
an appraising expression.</p>

<p>As he turned to look at her, she made up her mind
and spoke. “Is your name Mr. Martin?” she asked.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin frowned down at her. “What’s that got to
do with you?” he replied.</p>

<p>“ ’Cos if you are, Dad told me to give you the key,”
she continued, quite unabashed. “And there’s a message
from Mr. Lacey that you’re to go in and wait for him,
as he’ll be a few minutes late.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I see,” said Mr. Martin with a smile. “Yes, my
dear, I am Mr. Martin. How did your father come to have
the key?”</p>

<p>She jerked her head towards a sweet shop two or three
doors away. “We lives there,” she replied curtly. “Mr.
Briggs the builder, what’s working here, leaves it with
us because he’s my uncle. His men come and get it in the
morning. And Mr. Lacey, him what’s coming here,
telephoned just now to say you was coming to see the drains
and I was to give you the key.”</p>

<p>“Oh yes, that’s right,” said Mr. Martin, completely
reassured. “Thank you, my dear, I’ll see that either Mr.
Lacey or myself brings you back the key so that your
uncle’s men may get in on Monday morning. That’s the
shop, there, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>He waited until the child had disappeared into the
shop, then opened the door of Number 407 with the key
which she had given him, walked in and closed the door
behind him. Here he paused for a moment, thinking
rapidly. He felt that he was up against a brain as agile as
his own, and that the coming interview would demand
all his skill if he were to bring it to a favourable issue.
This man Lacey had taken steps to advertise the fact that
Mr. Martin had entered the premises, obviously as a
precaution against foul play. His automatic would be of no
use to him, he would have to rely upon his brains instead.</p>

<p>Then suddenly it flashed upon him that he had been
given a very fortunate opportunity. It was not to be
supposed that Lacey had left his discovery, whatever it was,
lying about the cellar in full view of the workmen who had
been there that morning. But, if he could have a quiet look
round by himself, he might gain some clue to the nature
of the discovery, and so be prepared to meet Lacey when
he arrived.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin was not anxious for Lacey to come upon
him unawares while he was searching the cellar.
Fortunately, the possibility of such an event could easily be
guarded against. He bolted the door top and bottom, and
noticed with satisfaction that the bolts were brand new,
evidently part of the alterations which the new tenant
was making to the premises. Then, after glancing round
the ground floor, and making sure that nobody was hidden
there, he made his way to the top of the stairway which led
down to the cellars. The upper part of the house had no
connection with the shop, and was approached by a
separate entrance.</p>

<p>He saw at once that the letter had been correct as to
the alterations being made. During his tenancy the cellars
had been lighted by gas, but now electric light was being
installed throughout. Mr. Martin could see the run of
the wires and the fittings for the lamps, but he noticed
that the lamps themselves had not yet been inserted. This
fact did not worry him. He had a box full of matches in
his pocket, and one of these he lit as he cautiously
descended the stairs. The builders’ litter was here, as
everywhere, and he picked his way among it until he stood in
the main vault below the shop. It smelt close and musty,
as though it had only recently been opened up after a long
period of disuse. Mr. Martin, holding a lighted match
above his head, glanced rapidly round. Nothing had been
altered here since he remembered it, except that a new
brass switch stood behind the door, and two empty lamp
sockets projected downwards from the ceiling.</p>

<p>The way to the little cellar below the back office lay
along a narrow passage, and this Mr. Martin followed,
striking a fresh match as he went. Every detail came back
to him, as though he had last passed this way yesterday,
instead of fifteen years ago. The door of the little cellar
closed with a spring; as he pushed it open the spring
creaked with a note which he remembered so well, and
the door closed behind him with the same muffled bang.
Again he raised his match and looked around him
anxiously. The cellar appeared to be the same as he had left
it, even to a mildewed packing case against the wall, which
had sometimes been used as a table. Only here, as in the
larger cellar, the electricians had been at work. There
was a lamp holder on the ceiling, but this time it held a
lamp. It was evidently by the light of this lamp that Lacey
had made his discovery. There was no reason why he
should not use it too.</p>

<p>The match had burnt down very near his fingers, but
as he dropped it he caught sight of the switch. Without
troubling to light another match he groped his way
towards it and turned it on. There was a flash and a sharp
report, but the cellar remained in complete darkness. Mr.
Martin, with a gasp, leapt for the door in sudden panic.
Someone hidden in the cellar must have fired at him. Then,
after a moment, the absurdity of the idea forced itself
upon him. The report had not been nearly loud enough
for a pistol, and the cellar was far too small to conceal
anybody. With a short laugh, but with trembling fingers,
he felt for his matchbox and struck a light.</p>

<p>Then at once he saw what had happened. The globe
had burst as he turned on the current, and only the butt
remained in the holder. He turned to look at the switch,
and then for the first time he noticed that something white
was hanging from it by a string. He bent down and held
his match close to it. It was a white counter, bearing
the figure IV in red ink.</p>

<p>With a sudden access of fear he clutched at it, in
order to examine it more closely. The string broke, and he
stared at the counter in his hand, fascinated. He began
to realize his position. He had been lured to this empty
house, and the assassin was no doubt even now in the
passage outside, waiting to plunge his deadly knife into
him as he emerged. Thank heaven, he had brought his
automatic with him!</p>

<p>Mr. Martin was no coward. His plan of defence was
quickly made. Throwing the match away, he took his
stand on the far side of the cellar, facing the door, his
automatic in his hand. If his assailant came in, he would
hear the creak of the spring, and could fire before the man
could reach him.</p>

<p>For a second or two he waited, tense and with ears
strained for the slightest sound. It was very quiet in the
cellar; the rumble of the traffic in Praed Street came to
him but faintly. Then, all at once, he caught his breath as
a pungent and unfamiliar smell reached him. Suddenly he
found himself choking, dizzy, his senses leaving him. An
overpowering impulse to escape from the cellar swept
through him, drowning his fear of what might be awaiting
him outside. He staggered towards the door, his hands
clawing wildly over its damp surface. There used to be a
string by which one pulled it open, but Mr. Martin could
not find it. Vainly he strove against the awful numbness
which closed in upon him. He must find the string,
must——</p>

<p>With a crash Mr. Martin fell down at the foot of the
door. The little cellar resumed its accustomed silence.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch09">

<h2>Chapter IX. <br/> A Strange Affair</h2>

<p>It was not until shortly after eight o’clock on Monday
morning that Inspector Whyland, who had arrived early
at the police station, received the startling intelligence
that there was a dead man lying in the cellar of Number
407, Praed Street. He immediately jumped into a taxi,
and was met in the door-way of the empty house by a
man who introduced himself as Mr. Houlder, the builder
who was carrying out certain alterations for the new
tenant, Mr. Lacey.</p>

<p>“My men found him when they came in this morning,”
he said. “They telephoned to me and I told them to fetch
a policeman. He rang you up, I understand. I think I can
explain how the man got in, and who he is.”</p>

<p>“Thanks very much, Mr. Houlder,” replied Whyland.
“I think we’ll have a look at him first, if you don’t mind.
Will you lead the way?”</p>

<p>They descended to the cellar together, Mr. Houlder
leading the way with an electric torch. As they arrived at
the passage leading to the small cellar, a constable
appeared and saluted.</p>

<p>“Ah, you’re in charge here, I suppose?” said the
Inspector. “You haven’t touched anything, I hope?”</p>

<p>“Not since I’ve been here, sir, but I understand that
the body was moved accidentally before I came, I’ve got
the man who found him here, sir.”</p>

<p>A man, who had been hidden in the gloom behind the
policeman, came forward at this. He explained that he
was the electrician who had been wiring the cellars. He
had very nearly finished the job on the previous Saturday,
and had left about noon. The carpenters were still
working on the ground floor when he left. He returned just
before eight this very morning, found the carpenters
already at work, and went down to the cellars to put the
finishing touches to the job. The door of the small cellar
appeared to be jammed, and he pushed against it to open
it. When he had got it open far enough to squeeze
through, he found the body of a man lying against it. He
had immediately run upstairs and told the foreman, and
had waited there till the constable came and asked him to
show him the body.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland dismissed Mr. Houlder and the
electricians, and went on into the cellar with the constable.
“There’s something queer about this business, sir?” said
the latter, as soon as they were alone. “I had a look round
while I was waiting for you, and the first thing I saw was
one of them white counters, same as the others had. There
it lies, sir, I didn’t touch it.”</p>

<p>They were in the cellar by now, and Whyland glanced
at the counter, lying in the beam of light which the
constable had thrown upon it. “With the figure IV on it, I’ll
wager,” he muttered. “Yes, I thought so. We’ll try for
finger marks, but I’ll bet it’s no good. Now, let’s have a
look at this dead man.”</p>

<p>The constable turned his lamp on the prostrate form,
and Whyland knelt down and gazed at it intently. The
body was lying doubled up as it had fallen, and was quite
cold.</p>

<p>“H’m,” said Whyland, rising to his feet. “We can’t
do much more till the doctor comes. You don’t know who
he is, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Mr. Houlder said he believed his name was Martin,
sir,” replied the constable cautiously.</p>

<p>“Well, you stay here till the doctor comes. I’ll go and
have a chat with Houlder. Just throw your light over the
floor for a minute. Hullo, what’s this?”</p>

<p>He strode across the cellar and carefully picked up a
small automatic. “Hasn’t been fired,” he muttered. “Now
I wonder who that belongs to? Just see if you can spot
anything else. Don’t touch it, if you do.”</p>

<p>He went upstairs again, and drew Mr. Houlder aside
into a quiet corner. Mr. Houlder’s story was a very simple
one. His foreman had orders to leave the key to the house
with Mr. Briggs, the confectioner, three doors off. Mr.
Briggs was Houlder’s brother-in-law. The reason for this
arrangement was that whoever came on the scene first
could get the key and start work. On Saturday the key
had been left as usual, about 12.30.</p>

<p>On Saturday evening, about nine o’clock, Mr. Briggs
had come to his place and told him that Mr. Lacey, who
knew about the key arrangement, had rung him up to say
that a Mr. Martin was coming to inspect the drains. Mr.
Lacey was to have met him at two o’clock, but would be
delayed. Would Mr. Briggs keep a lookout for him and
give him the keys. Mr. Briggs had promised to do so, and
his daughter Marjorie had seen Mr. Martin, who had
promised to bring back the keys, but had not done so.
Mr. Briggs had forgotten all about them until the evening,
and then, finding that the door of Number 407 was
securely locked, had supposed that Mr. Martin had gone
away with the keys in his pocket. Mr. Houlder had agreed
with this theory, and had given Mr. Briggs a duplicate
key which he happened to have.</p>

<p>The foreman had called on Mr. Briggs, and had been
given the duplicate key. But when he came to try the door,
it would not open. He made several attempts but, finding
them unavailing, desisted and made his way through a
window at the back. He then discovered that the door
was bolted on the inside, a circumstance which puzzled
him tremendously. Shortly afterwards the electrician
arrived, and his thoughts were diverted into other
channels.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland spent a few minutes talking to the
foreman, who confirmed the latter part of Houlder’s
story, and had barely finished his enquiries when the
doctor arrived. The two went down to the cellar together,
and the doctor, without wasting words, proceeded to
examine the body, Whyland watching him intently.</p>

<p>“Poisoned!” pronounced the doctor, after a short
interval. “Prussic acid, by all signs of it, but I can’t be
sure till I’ve made a post-mortem. You’ll have him taken
to the mortuary, of course? Queer place to choose for
suicide. How did he get in here?”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland shook his head. “I don’t think it’s
a case of suicide, doctor. Look here!”</p>

<p>He pointed to the numbered counter. The doctor
glanced at it and sniffed contemptuously. “You fellows
have got counters on the brain since that business last
month,” he said. “How do you know he didn’t put it there
himself to throw you off the scent? It’s not uncommon for
suicides to try and make their deaths look like murder.
You’ll find there’s some question of insurance behind it.
Well, I’ll be along at the mortuary and let you know
the result of the <span class="sc">p.m.</span>”</p>

<p>The doctor bustled away, and Whyland, having made
arrangements for the removal of the body, made a very
careful examination of the cellar. This done, he sent the
constable for the electrician, and asked him to look round
and see if he could find anything which had not been there
when he left on Saturday.</p>

<p>The man looked about him carefully, and suddenly
pointed to the ceiling with an exclamation of astonishment.
“Why, there’s the butt of a broken lamp in that
holder, sir,” he said. “I didn’t put no lamps in before I
left. That’s one of the things I came here to do to-day.”</p>

<p>“Well, take it out and put in a fresh lamp,” replied
Whyland. “I didn’t know the current was on. We’ll be
able to see what we’re doing.”</p>

<p>The electrician obeyed him, and no sooner had he put
the new lamp in the holder than the cellar was flooded with
light. “Hullo!” he exclaimed. “The switch is on. I’ll swear
I left it off on Saturday. Why, that’s queer! This isn’t
the butt of an ordinary lamp at all. Looks to me like one
of them electric detonator things, made to go into a
lamp-socket. And it’s gone off, too. You can see where it’s
blackened, sir.”</p>

<p>“Was the current on on Saturday?” asked Whyland,
quickly.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, I connected up in the morning,” replied the
electrician. “Somebody must have put that thing in the
lamp-holder, then turned the switch on. Well, that’s a
rum go, and no mistake.”</p>

<p>Whyland, having cautioned the man to say nothing
until the inquest, left the house and walked into the
confectioner’s shop. Here he interviewed Mr. Briggs and
his daughter Marjorie, and obtained from them the story
of Mr. Martin’s arrival at Number 407, and of the
telephone message from Mr. Lacey. By this time the body
had been conveyed to the mortuary, and Whyland set to
work to examine the contents of the dead man’s pockets.
His most interesting discoveries were the letter which he
had received on Saturday morning and the missing key of
Number 407.</p>

<p>The doctor arrived and performed his post-mortem,
which confirmed the suspicions he had already formed.
“Prussic acid, right enough, and a pretty powerful dose
by the look of it. The queer thing about it is that he seems
to have died from breathing the vapour rather than
from swallowing the stuff. Looks as if he’d uncorked a
bottle of the strong acid and sniffed at it. You didn’t
see anything of the kind lying about the cellar, I
suppose?”</p>

<p>Whyland shook his head. “No, I didn’t,” he replied.
“The only thing I found lying about was a loaded
automatic which hadn’t been fired.”</p>

<p>“What did I tell you?” said the doctor triumphantly.
“Suicide, without a doubt. He took a pistol with him in
case the stuff didn’t act. You’re suggesting that anybody
murdered a powerful man like that by making him inhale
prussic acid against his will, are you? Why, the idea’s
absurd.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland left the mortuary in a very
thoughtful frame of mind, and returned to the police station.
Here he set the telephone to work and invoked the aid
of his colleagues. By the middle of the afternoon he had
collected some interesting information respecting both
Martin and Lacey, upon which he began to build up his
own theory as to the former’s death.</p>

<p>Mr. Martin had carried on a wine merchant’s business
at 407, Praed Street, until fifteen years before. He had
then moved to the Barbican, where he employed two
clerks and a couple of packers. He had never married, and
lived at a boarding house in Streatham. He had more than
once gone away for the week-end without notice, and his
absence had therefore caused no concern. He was not
known to have any enemies, although more than once
there had been some unsavoury rumours in circulation as
to his dealings with girls whom he had engaged as his
secretaries. His movements on Saturday morning were
traced from the time he left his office to his reaching
Aldersgate station. Finally, as a result of the hint
contained in the letter signed John Lacey, the police had
searched his office, and had found there certain papers
which threw a flood of light upon a long sequence of jewel
robberies extending back for the last twenty years.</p>

<p>Mr. Lacey was the owner of a group of grocer’s shops
scattered about West London. He had acquired the lease
of Number 407, when the premises were given up by the
late tenant, a clothier. He had never heard of Mr. Martin,
and had certainly never written to him. He always signed
himself John R. Lacey, and the signature on the letter
found on Mr. Martin’s body bore no resemblance
whatever to his handwriting. He had only once entered the
cellars of Number 407, and had made no discoveries there
of any kind. On Saturday he had left Liverpool Street at
ten o’clock, to stay with his brother in Ipswich, and had
not returned until the first train on Monday morning.
He had sent no telephone message to Mr. Briggs, nor had
he made any appointment with anybody to inspect the
drains of Number 407. He had no key of the premises,
having given the only two which so far as he knew existed
to Houlder, the builder. He was utterly unable to throw
any light whatever upon the incident, since more than a
week had passed since he had visited Praed Street.</p>

<p>Two other facts did Inspector Whyland discover. The
first, which did not astonish him, was that the letter
signed John Lacey had in all probability been typed upon
the same machine as had been the envelope in which the
numbered counter had been sent to Richard Pargent. The
second, which was distinctly perplexing, was that the call
to Mr. Briggs had been made from a call-box at
Aldersgate station, apparently at the very time when Mr.
Martin was known to have been there. Lastly, the automatic
was identified as the property of Mr. Martin, and a
fingermark on the counter corresponded to an imprint
taken from the dead man’s hand.</p>

<p>The significance of the curious butt found by the
electrician in the lamp-holder was not so clear. It seemed
reasonable to assume that nobody but the dead man had
entered the premises after they had been locked by the
foreman on Saturday morning. Whyland had examined
all the doors and windows very carefully, and had
satisfied himself that they bore no signs of violence. He could
account for both keys, and although it was possible that
a third key existed, it seemed unlikely that anyone had
used it between 12.30 and two. Again, since the door had
been found bolted on Monday morning, it was probable
that the dead man had bolted it behind him, and that he
was alone in the house when he died. The foreman had
assured him that he had found the windows fastened
inside, and that it was only by the use of a special tool that
he had been enabled to open the one at the back. It looked
very much as if Martin had himself fixed the butt in the
lamp-holder. But why?</p>

<p>Certainly it looked very like a case of suicide. But
against this theory was the letter found in the dead man’s
pocket and the numbered counter. Martin himself might
have deposited the latter, as the doctor had suggested,
but would he have gone so far as to write a letter which
must certainly put the police on the alert when it was
found? It seemed highly improbable. Inspector Whyland
felt convinced that the death of Mr. Martin was merely
another link in the mysterious chain of murders in Praed
Street.</p>

<p>The evening papers were, of course, full of it, though
naturally somewhat guarded. “Another tragedy in Praed
Street. City man found poisoned in Empty House”—such
was the general trend of their headlines. And Praed
Street, which had begun to breathe again during the
respite of the past month, felt once more the cold touch
of almost superstitious horror. The killer was abroad
again, unknown, unrecognized, and no man could tell
when he might feel the dread hand of death upon his
shoulder.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland, walking through Praed Street that
evening about ten o’clock, heard a cheerful voice bid him
good evening, and turned to find Mr. Ludgrove by his
side.</p>

<p>“Hullo, Mr. Ludgrove!” he exclaimed. “I called at your
place just now, and found it shut up. I thought you were
away.”</p>

<p>“I have been taking my usual evening stroll,” replied
the herbalist. “Won’t you come in? I’m on my way home
now.”</p>

<p>With scarcely a moment’s hesitation, Whyland
accepted the invitation. There was always the chance that
the herbalist might make some suggestion which would
throw light on this latest problem. He waited until they
were seated in the familiar back room before he asked
the inevitable question. “You’ve heard what happened
here this morning, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“I have, indeed,” replied Mr. Ludgrove gravely. “The
papers contain little beyond the bare facts, but I gather
that this unfortunate Mr. Martin was undoubtedly
murdered?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid so,” replied the Inspector. “And I fancy
by the same hand which committed the previous murders.
We found a typed letter on him, suggesting that he should
call at Number 407, which had been posted in this
district, and there was a counter bearing the number IV
lying by his side. You don’t happen to know anything
about this Mr. Martin, I suppose?”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove shook his head. “I understand that he
left Praed Street fifteen years ago,” he replied. “That
was long before I came here. In those days I was leading
a very quiet life in Devonshire.” He paused, and a curious
look of sadness came into his eyes, as of some painful
memory. Then he continued briskly, as if ashamed of his
momentary lapse. “I daresay that Mr. Copperdock
remembers him, he has a wonderful memory for everybody
who has ever lived in the neighbourhood.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland’s eyes contracted slightly as he
replied. “Yes, he remembers him all right. They did a
certain amount of business together, he tells me. In fact,
Mr. Copperdock is the only person about here who will
admit to knowing anything about this fellow Martin.”</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose that we are all under suspicion once
more,” said Mr. Ludgrove, with a kindly smile. “No,
Inspector, it’s no use protesting; I know exactly how I
should look at the matter if I were in your place. Until
you have some definite clue to the perpetrator of the
crimes, the whole neighbourhood is equally guilty in your
eyes. I may say that I left here about one o’clock on
Saturday, caught the 1.55 from Fenchurch, spent the day
in Essex, and did not return until after dark. Not, I
gather, that an alibi is much use in this case, since it
appears that this Mr. Martin was alone in the house, in any
event.”</p>

<p>“I wish everybody in Praed Street would deal with
me as frankly as you have, Mr. Ludgrove,” replied
Whyland. “There seems to be a sort of dread in the minds of
most of them that the police will in some way take
advantage of everything they say. Take Copperdock, for
example. I’ve been talking to him, and he tells me he
was at the Cambridge Arms for half an hour or so some
time between one and two. Yet neither he nor his son
will tell me exactly what time he left his shop or returned
to it. They didn’t notice, they say.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Copperdock is not blessed with a very exact
mind,” said Mr. Ludgrove soothingly. “You remember
the curious incident of his meeting with the black sailor
some time ago. By the way, I suppose that rather
intangible person has not yet appeared in connection with
the present case, has he? Although nearly everybody
whom I have seen this evening has some theory to
account for the facts, I have so far heard no reference to
the black sailor.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland smiled as he rose to take his
departure. “I’m so certain that the black sailor will never
be found that I would willingly double the reward out of
my own pocket,” he said. “He’s a myth, originating in
the fertile imagination of that young scoundrel Wal
Snyder. Well, good night, Mr. Ludgrove. Let me know if you
hear any useful hint, won’t you?”</p>

<p>It was not until he was some yards down the street that
he laughed shortly to himself. “That old chap suspects
Copperdock as much as I do,” he muttered. “But if it is
Copperdock, what the devil is his game, I wonder?”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch10">

<h2>Chapter X. <br/> At Scotland Yard</h2>

<p>The experts to whom the curious device found by the
electrician in the little cellar had been sent duly made
their report. In their opinion, the butt was all that
remained of an ingenious poison-bomb. The original machine
consisted of a socket made to fit into an ordinary
lamp-holder, but the place of the filament had been taken by a
piece of fine wire, round which had been wrapped a thread
of gun-cotton. Attached to the socket, and in contact with
the gun-cotton, had been a sealed celluloid bulb containing
pure prussic acid.</p>

<p>The action of such a bomb would be perfectly simple.
It had only to be placed in a lamp-holder, and the switch
turned on. The current would heat the fine wire, and so
ignite the strand of gun-cotton. This in turn would set fire
to the celluloid bulb, and its contents would be released
in the form of vapour. Although some of this vapour would
become ignited, enough would be available to permeate
the atmosphere of a room far larger than the small cellar.
And, of course, the inhalation of the vapour would rapidly
produce death.</p>

<p>This opinion, the report stated, was purely speculative,
since only the socket of the bomb remained for examination.
Inspector Whyland, after consultation with his Chief
at Scotland Yard, decided that it had better not be made
public. The idea, though it was probably correct, was
hypothetical, and altogether too vague to be put before a
coroner’s jury. It certainly strengthened Whyland’s
conviction that Mr. Martin had been murdered, for no man
would go to the trouble of constructing an elaborate
poison-bomb with which to kill himself when he might just
as easily have inhaled the acid outright. When the
electrician left the cellar on the Saturday the bomb had not
been there. Whyland was convinced that the man was
speaking the truth upon this point. The only two
alternatives remaining were that somebody had entered
the house between the departure of the foreman and the
arrival of Mr. Martin, or that Martin had placed the
bomb in position himself. The field of speculation opened
by these alternatives was so vast and barren of any clue
that their exploration must be a matter of considerable
time.</p>

<p>As a matter of fact, the Assistant Commissioner was
by no means convinced that Mr. Martin had been murdered.
“We all know what a difficult job you’re up against
in trying to trace the murders of these two fellows, Tovey
and Pargent,” he said to Whyland in an interview to which
he had summoned him, “But don’t you think you’re rather
too much inclined to see the hand of the murderer in
everything that happens in that district? Now, honestly,
assuming that Martin was murdered, have you the slightest
clue which could possibly lead to the conviction of the
murderer?”</p>

<p>“No, sir, I haven’t,” replied Whyland. “But I’ve got
my suspicions of this man Copperdock, whom I’ve
mentioned to you.”</p>

<p>“Suspicions aren’t evidence,” said the Assistant
Commissioner shortly. “Bring home the original murders to
him by all means and then perhaps you’ll be able to link
him up with the death of this man Martin. At present, so
far as I can see, you’ll find it difficult to convince a jury
that Martin was murdered. That poison-bomb theory is a
bit far-fetched, you must admit.”</p>

<p>“It is, rather, sir,” agreed Whyland. “Still we’ve got the
letter and the numbered counter——”</p>

<p>“It’s just that letter that worries me,” interrupted the
Chief. “It was through the letter that you discovered that
Martin was a receiver of stolen goods—a very smart piece
of work, Whyland, upon which I congratulate you. But,
until we have rounded them all up, we don’t want the
gentlemen with whom Martin dealt to become aware of our
knowledge. If the existence of that letter becomes known,
they’ll tumble to it at once. I should very much prefer the
letter to be kept secret, for the present, at all events.”</p>

<p>The Assistant Commissioner paused, and Whyland
glanced at him quickly. “I see no reason why it should be
mentioned at the inquest, sir,” he said. “Nobody knows
of its existence outside of the police.”</p>

<p>“Then I should be inclined to say nothing about it,”
remarked the Assistant Commissioner. “Nor, I imagine,
will it be necessary to bring into prominence the
hypothesis of the poison-bomb, or the fact that you have any
suspicions of foul play. I am not suggesting that you should
wilfully mislead the coroner, mind. But it is usually a
mistake to volunteer information when no useful purpose
can be served by so doing.”</p>

<p>So it happened that the doctor’s evidence at the inquest
remain unchallenged. The theory was that Martin,
having decided to take his own life, was attracted to his old
premises knowing them to be empty. In order to obtain
access, he telephoned himself from Aldersgate station to
Mr. Briggs, using Mr. Lacey’s name. Having thus secured
the key, he bolted the door behind him to prevent any
interruption, then went into the cellar and inhaled the
vapour of prussic acid. The automatic he had brought with
him in the case the poison should prove ineffective. The
numbered counter, which he had also brought with him,
as the finger-marks upon it showed, merely emphasized
the morbid state of mind which had prompted him to the
deed.</p>

<p>The jury returned a verdict of suicide during temporary
insanity, in accordance with this theory, and, to all
outward appearances the case of Mr. Martin was disposed
of. But Inspector Whyland, although relieved to feel that
yet another unsolved crime had not been added to his
already mounting debit account, knew well enough at heart
that once again his mysterious adversary had scored a
point against him. But again, there was this insoluble
riddle of motive. It was possible to suggest more than one
motive for the murder of Mr. Martin. He might, for
instance, have fallen out with one of the jewel thieves with
whom he had such intimate relations. Or again, his
dealings with women might have been at the bottom of it. But,
assuming one of these suppositions to be correct, how was
the death of Mr. Martin to be linked with the previous
murders? Or were they indeed all the work of separate
persons, who imitated one another’s methods with a view
to confusing the issue?</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland recalled his mind from such
unprofitable speculations. He felt that the solution of the
whole mystery lay close under his hand, if he could but
devise the means to unearth it. Somehow Mr. Copperdock’s
name always came up in connection with these
murders. He had been Tovey’s most intimate friend. The
pipe which had been the cause of Colburn’s death had been
bought at his shop. He must have been within a few yards
of the scene when Pargent was murdered. And Whyland
had no doubt that he would discover some point of
contact between Mr. Copperdock and the present case.</p>

<p>He was not disappointed. It came out, in the course of
a conversation between him and Houlder, the builder. It
seemed that Houlder, who was an occasional frequenter
of the Cambridge Arms, had mentioned, early in the
month, that a new tenant had taken Number 407, and that
he had got the job of altering the premises for him. Mr.
Copperdock had displayed great interest in this remark,
and as a result Houlder had invited him to come and look
over the place. Mr. Copperdock had accepted, and he and
Houlder had been over every inch of it. This might have
been pure curiosity on Mr. Copperdock’s part, but at least
the fact was significant. Inspector Whyland stored it in
the mental pigeon-hole which already contained the note
that Martin and Copperdock had done considerable
business together in the past.</p>

<p>Thus, putting the case mathematically, Mr. Copperdock
was the highest common factor of the terms representing
the four dead men. Inspector Whyland had spent much
time and care in investigating their histories and their
actions, and he could find no other factor common to
them all. They had been, so far as he had been able to
ascertain, complete strangers to one another, and they
could never consciously have met one another. The only
characteristics which they had in common were that they
had all received counters numbered in the order of their
deaths, that they were all males, and that their ages had
all been over fifty.</p>

<p>Naturally, the mind of Praed Street was not greatly
relieved by the verdict on the death of Mr. Martin. Violent
death was becoming far too frequent an incident for any
of the local community to feel safe. Men wondered when
it would be their turn to find the fatal counter, and how
they should ward off the death which so swiftly followed.
It was not as though one could tell exactly what
one had to guard against. The knife had been used twice,
certainly, but poison in one form or another had accounted
for two of the deaths.</p>

<p>The numbered counters were the characteristic feature
of the case which appealed most strongly to the popular
imagination. Inexplicable murders were common enough,
even murders in which no motive or criminal had ever
been found. But a series of murders, each prefixed by a
definite warning, were an entirely novel sensation. The
theory of the counters was publicly discussed from every
possible point of view, without any really satisfactory
theory being arrived at. Quite a large proportion of the
population of London opened their morning papers in
expectation of finding news of the delivery of counter
number V.</p>

<p>The news, when it came, illustrated the hold which the
subject had upon men’s minds, and the moral effect which
it has produced. Mr. Ludgrove read the story as he
consumed his frugal breakfast, and he was not surprised to
hear Mr. Copperdock’s voice in the shop a few minutes
later.</p>

<p>“Come in, Mr. Copperdock,” he called, and the
tobacconist, paper in hand, the light of excitement in his
eyes, entered through the curtained door.</p>

<p>“Have you seen this about this old chap Goodwin?” he
enquired, without preliminary.</p>

<p>“I have indeed,” replied Mr. Ludgrove gravely. “I
imagine that the whole thing was an utterly heartless
practical joke. I only hope the police will be able to trace
the sender.”</p>

<p>“Aye, practical joke, maybe, but it killed him all the
same,” said Mr. Copperdock doubtfully. “Fancy an old
chap like that, what couldn’t have had more than a year
or two to live! The paper says that he couldn’t even walk
from one room to another, had to be wheeled in a chair.
This daughter of his what was looking after him says
here that the doctor had told her that any shock might be
fatal. Wonder if she sent it herself, being tired of waiting
for his money? Listen, this is what she says: ‘My father’s
chief amusement was to read the papers. He took the
keenest interest in every item of news, and often
discussed them with me. We often talked about the murders
which have taken place recently in Praed Street, and my
father always maintained that the curious episode of the
numbered counters proved that they were not the work of
a maniac.’ ”</p>

<p>“Yes. It is easy to understand what a shock the receipt
of the counter must have been to him,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove reflectively. “It would be interesting to know who,
besides his daughter, knew of this passion for news on
his part. I see by the account in my paper that three
letters arrived for him by the morning post, and that his
daughter brought them in to him on his breakfast tray.
He opened the first one, and a counter numbered V fell
out of it.”</p>

<p>“Then he fell back on his pillow and never spoke again,”
put in Mr. Copperdock excitedly. “The shock killed him
right enough, as the doctors had said it would. I wouldn’t
like to be in the shoes of the person what sent it him.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove glanced at his friend sharply. “I cannot
understand it, except upon the assumption of a practical
joke, and a particularly cruel one at that,” he said. “Here
was this Mr. Goodwin, a retired manufacturer, who had
been living in this house at Highgate for many years past.
All his acquaintances knew that his heart was very
seriously affected, and that he had only a short time to live. Of
course, we know nothing of his past history, but,
whatever motive there may have been, to murder a man in
his condition would merely be to anticipate the course of
nature by a few months. And, in our experience, the
receipt of the counter has always been followed by violent
death. I say we know nothing about him; I certainly do
not. I suppose that you have never heard of him before,
have you, Mr. Copperdock?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock shook his head. “Never!” he replied
emphatically. “Seems to me it’s just like that poet chap,
Pargent. Somebody sends him the counter, and his
number’s up. Well thank heaven, it didn’t happen in Praed
Street, this time.”</p>

<p>It was not long after Mr. Copperdock’s departure that
Inspector Whyland came in to see the herbalist. He said
nothing, but glanced at Mr. Ludgrove enquiringly.</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ve seen it in the paper,” said Mr. Ludgrove.
“As a matter of fact, I’ve just been discussing it with Mr.
Copperdock. He came over here as soon as he read about
it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, he did, did he?” replied Whyland. “And what do
you make of it, may I ask?”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove shrugged his shoulders. “I know no more
than what the paper contains,” he said. “It looks to me
like a practical joke. I shouldn’t wonder if some idiot
derives amusement from sending these counters broadcast.
I daresay he gets the names of people to send them
to from the telephone directory.”</p>

<p>“Practical joke? H’m,” said Whyland. “Mind, I’m not
denying that a lot of fools do send out these counters to
their friends. The Yard has had dozens of cases reported
to them. I always said that would happen as soon as people
heard about them. But in this case I have seen the
envelope in which the counter was sent. It was typed on the
same machine as the others, and it was posted in this
district, exactly as the others were. Your practical joker
has followed his original model pretty closely, don’t you
think?”</p>

<p>The ardent seekers after sensation redoubled their
eagerness for news of the next counter. Although opinion
on the whole followed Mr. Ludgrove in attributing the
counter sent to Mr. Goodwin to some irresponsible
practical joker, the fact that death had undoubtedly followed
its receipt caused many to shake their heads knowingly. If
Mr. Martin’s death had been due to suicide, and Mr.
Goodwin’s to a practical joke, how would the original
sender of the counters number his next one? It was not to
be supposed that he would claim credit for these spurious
imitations of his work. If the next number were to be VI,
public opinion was quite prepared to credit him with
having compassed the last two deaths. But most people
anticipated that it would bear the number IV.</p>

<p>The fact that such discussion was possible showed
clearly that the theory of the existence of some mysterious
assassin had captured the popular imagination. There
was really no reason why any murderer should not send
a numbered counter to his prospective victim, but people
argued, quite correctly, that murders were far more often
the result of sudden impulse than of deliberate intention.
It was for this reason that the “counter deaths” as they
were sometimes called, attracted so much attention. Yet
the weeks drew into months, and the cold winds of spring
took the place of the misty drizzle of winter, without any
news of another numbered counter being received. The
arm-chair criminologists gave it as their opinion that the
last had been heard of them, that the mysterious criminal
had either fulfilled his vengeance or had died unrecognized
in some lunatic asylum. The murders in Praed Street were
added to the long list of undiscovered crimes, and slowly
they began to be forgotten.</p>

<p>One evening towards the end of April, Mr. Copperdock
was sitting in the herbalist’s back room, enjoying a
generous whiskey and soda. He was on his way home from the
Cambridge Arms, and, seeing his friend’s door still open,
had looked in for a chat. The night was warm, one of those
nights which London sometimes experiences in early
spring, conveying the promise, so rarely fulfilled, of a fine
summer.</p>

<p>The liquor which he had consumed made Mr. Copperdock
even more communicative than usual. Some reference
to his son had led him on to speak of Ivy, and thus, by a
simple association of ideas, to the murder of Mr. Tovey.</p>

<p>“You know, Ludgrove, that fellow Whyland always
suspected me of having to do with that business,” he said.
“I don’t believe he’s satisfied yet, between ourselves. At
one time he was always hanging about, coming into my
place at all hours, and asking all sorts of questions. I
used to see chaps lounging about outside, and sometimes
they followed me when I went out. It was jolly
uncomfortable, I can tell you.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. “I don’t suppose you were any
more under suspicion than the rest of us,” he replied.
“Whyland had an idea that somebody in this neighbourhood
was responsible, and I don’t know that I don’t agree
with him. He came in here, too, and asked questions, for
that matter. For all I know he may have suspected me.”</p>

<p>But Mr. Copperdock shook his head. “No, Ludgrove,
that won’t do,” he said. “There was something about the
way he spoke to me that gave him away. He still comes
in sometimes, and asks me all sorts of questions about
those poor fellows who were killed. Very often they’re
the same things as he’s asked before. Trying to catch
me out, I suppose. And he’s always asking if I’ve ever seen
the black sailor again.”</p>

<p>“I suppose you really did see him?” asked Mr.
Ludgrove casually.</p>

<p>“See him? I saw him as plain as I see you now,” replied
Mr. Copperdock, with some indignation. “What would I
want to say I’d seen him for if I hadn’t? I wish now I’d
never said anything about it. I wouldn’t have, but I
thought it would be doing Whyland a good turn.”</p>

<p>“Well, it’s all over now,” said Mr. Ludgrove soothingly.
“We haven’t had any of these mysterious deaths for nearly
three months now. I don’t expect that Inspector Whyland
will worry his head about the matter much longer.”</p>

<p>“I hope he won’t,” replied Mr. Copperdock truculently.
“I’ll give him a piece of mind if he comes round
worrying me much more. I’m as respectable a man as any in
this street, I’d have him know.”</p>

<p>He finished his drink, and rose to go. Mr. Ludgrove
saw him off the premises, then settled himself down once
more in his chair to read.</p>

<p>Five minutes later he heard a heavy step hurrying
through the shop, and the form of Mr. Copperdock
appeared unceremoniously through the curtain that covered
the door of the inner room. Mr. Ludgrove rose to his feet
in concern. The tobacconist’s face was deathly pale, and
his hands were trembling violently. He staggered across
the room, and sank down into the chair he had so lately
quitted.</p>

<p>He held out one shaking hand open towards the herbalist.
“Here, look at this!” he exclaimed in a queer hoarse
voice.</p>

<p>The herbalist bent over the outstretched hand. In the
palm of it lay a white counter, upon which the figure VI
had been roughly drawn in red ink.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch11">

<h2>Chapter XI. <br/> The Sixth Counter</h2>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove looked at the counter and then raised
his eyes to Mr. Copperdock’s face. The tobacconist was
staring at him with an expression of complete bewilderment
and terror, very different from his truculent demeanour
of a few minutes earlier. The herbalist checked the
slow smile which had begun to twitch the corner of his
lips, and sat down quietly opposite Mr. Copperdock.</p>

<p>“Where did you find this?” he asked.</p>

<p>“On my bed, after I left you just now,” replied the
tobacconist. “It wasn’t there when I went out to the
Cambridge Arms this evening, I’ll swear. I always goes
upstairs to have a wash before I goes out, and I’d have
been bound to have seen it. It’s that black sailor. I always
thought he’d get me.”</p>

<p>“Well, he hasn’t got you yet,” said Mr. Ludgrove
soothingly. “Now that you have been warned, we can take the
proper precautions. How do you suppose this counter
came into your room?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock shook his head helplessly. “It beats
me,” he replied. “I locked the door behind me when I
went out, and nobody couldn’t have got in till I went back
just now, seeing as I had the key in my pocket all the
time.”</p>

<p>“You locked the door when you went out? Was Ted
out, too, then?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Ted and I went out together, about half-past
eight. He was going to spend the evening with the Toveys.
I don’t expect him back till nigh on eleven. I goes round
to the Cambridge Arms, where I stays until I comes in
to you just now. And when I gets back, there was this
counter, right in the middle of my bed. I just picks it up
and comes over to you. I daren’t stay no longer in the
house alone.”</p>

<p>“You didn’t notice if anything else in the house had
been disturbed, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“I didn’t stop to look. It gave me such a turn seeing
that thing there, I didn’t hardly know what I was doing.”</p>

<p>“Well, you’d better stay here until your son comes
back,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “It is very nearly eleven now.
I suppose you shut the door behind you when you came
over here? How will Ted get in?”</p>

<p>“We both has our keys,” replied Mr. Copperdock.
“Ted’s a good boy. I wouldn’t have minded so much if
he’d been there.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’ll go to the door and watch for him,” said
Mr. Ludgrove cheerfully. “You’ll be all right here, Mr.
Copperdock.”</p>

<p>“Don’t you go no further than the door!” exclaimed
the tobacconist fearfully. “For all I know that black sailor
chap may be on the lookout, and seen me come across
here. He’ll get me, for sure.”</p>

<p>“He won’t get you here, I promise you,” said Mr.
Ludgrove reassuringly. He mixed a strong whiskey and
water, and placed it in the trembling hand of his guest.
“You drink this while I go into the shop and keep an
eye open for your son.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove had not been at his post for many
minutes before Ted came swinging along the opposite
pavement. He stopped at the sound of the herbalist’s
voice, and crossed the road towards him. In a few
whispered words Mr. Ludgrove acquainted him with what
had happened.</p>

<p>Ted said nothing, but jerked his elbow upwards and
winked suggestively.</p>

<p>“No, I don’t think so,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “But you
had better come in and talk to him.”</p>

<p>The two entered the back room together, and Mr.
Copperdock looked up anxiously as they came in.</p>

<p>“Ah, Ted, my boy, I’m glad to see you,” he said
dolefully. “The black sailor’s on my track, and he’ll get me,
for sure.”</p>

<p>“Nonsense, Dad,” replied Ted heartily. “Somebody put
that counter on your bed for a joke; one of your pals
at the Cambridge Arms, I’ll be bound. You come along
home with me, and we’ll soon find out who it was.”</p>

<p>But Mr. Copperdock shook his head. “I wouldn’t go
into that house again not to-night, no, not if you was to
pay me,” he replied firmly. “I’d sooner go and spend the
night at the police station.”</p>

<p>“You needn’t do that,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “You can
spend the night here on my bed upstairs. I have no
objection to sleeping on the chair.”</p>

<p>“I daren’t be left alone,” lamented Mr. Copperdock.
“Anybody might have seen me cross the road and come
in here. Do you think Inspector Whyland would send a
couple of coppers along if Ted was to ring him up? I’d
feel a lot safer if they was about.”</p>

<p>“I hardly think he would,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “But
if you like we will spend the night together in this room.
You can have one chair, and I will have the other. I can
put a mattress on the floor for Ted if he cares to join us.”</p>

<p>“Not I, I’m going home to bed,” put in Ted heartily,
with a wink at the herbalist. “Somebody ought to be on
guard over at our place in case the black sailor breaks
in, you know, Dad.”</p>

<p>Rather reluctantly Mr. Copperdock agreed to this
arrangement. After a few more minutes’ conversation, Ted
went home, and the two settled themselves down in the
chairs. A further strong whiskey and water produced its
effect upon Mr. Copperdock, and he was very soon dozing
restlessly. To Mr. Ludgrove sleep seemed an unnecessary
luxury. He moved quietly over to his bench, and spent the
greater part of the night absorbed in his herbs and his
microscope, apparently entirely oblivious of the presence
of his guest. The only sign he manifested of interest in
his affairs was to pick up the counter and examine it very
carefully through a powerful lens.</p>

<p>It was not until seven o’clock in the morning that he
gently shook the sleeping form. Mr. Copperdock woke
with a start, and stared about him with puzzled eyes.</p>

<p>“I’ve got a cup of tea ready for you, Mr. Copperdock,”
said the herbalist. “I thought it was time to wake you, as
Mrs. Cooper will be here presently, and if she found you
here she might talk. We don’t want that, do we?”</p>

<p>The tobacconist rose stiffly to his feet and shook
himself. “Very kind of you, I’m sure, Ludgrove,” he said.
“Yes, I remember. What did you do with that counter?”</p>

<p>“I have it here,” replied the herbalist. “You are still
quite sure that you found it on your bed last night? It
wasn’t by any chance slipped into your pocket by
somebody at the Cambridge Arms?”</p>

<p>“As sure as I live. I found it on my bed, same as I
told you,” affirmed Mr. Copperdock earnestly. “I wasn’t
tight last night, if that’s what you’re getting at.”</p>

<p>“No, no, of course not,” replied Mr. Ludgrove
soothingly. “Now, shall we go across and see if your son heard
anything during the night?”</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock agreeing, they crossed the road to the
tobacconist’s shop, and let themselves in. Ted was still
asleep, and they had some difficulty in waking him. When
they had done so, he reported that he had had a good look
round the place before he went to bed, and had found
nothing unusual. After that—well, he had gone to sleep,
and had heard nothing until they had awakened him.</p>

<p>The light of morning appeared to have instilled rather
more courage into Mr. Copperdock’s heart. He announced
his determination to carry on business as usual, but
insisted that Inspector Whyland should be communicated
with and told of his discovery of the numbered counter.
It was about ten o’clock when Whyland arrived in Praed
Street, but instead of going straight to Copperdock’s shop,
he went first to the herbalist’s.</p>

<p>“What’s this story about Copperdock having found a
numbered counter?” he asked, as soon as they were safely
hidden in the back room from prying ears.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove recounted his experiences of the past
night, and as he came to a conclusion Whyland laughed
contemptuously. “Is this another of Copperdock’s
hallucinations, like that meeting of his with the black sailor?”
he enquired.</p>

<p>“Not altogether,” replied Mr. Ludgrove with a smile.
“The counter is real enough, at all events. He left it here
last night. Here it is.”</p>

<p>Whyland examined the counter in silence. He had very
little doubt that Mr. Copperdock had staged the whole
affair, had written the figure VI upon it in red ink himself,
and had placed it on his bed. But why? What was his
game? Was this a feeble scheme to draw suspicion from
himself? The series of murders appeared to have come to
an end. What was the point of reviving the memory of
them like this?</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove broke in upon his meditations. “I took
the liberty of examining it under a powerful glass,” he
said, nodding his head towards the bench. “It seems to
be an ordinary bone counter and the figure VI has been
drawn upon it with a steel pen and red ink.”</p>

<p>“Just as the others were,” agreed Whyland. “I’ll keep
this counter, if you don’t mind. I want to add it to my
collection. Now I suppose I had better step across and see
Copperdock. I should like you to come with me, if you
can spare the time.”</p>

<p>“I think I can risk shutting the shop for a few minutes,”
replied the herbalist. “I get very few customers in the
morning. Most of the people who require my services are
at work all day.”</p>

<p>“Dishonest work, I’ll be bound,” said Whyland
chaffingly. “Well, come along, then.”</p>

<p>They went across to Mr. Copperdock’s shop together,
and were shown by the tobacconist into the room behind
the shop, which was used as an office. At one side was a
table upon which stood a Planet typewriter, at the other
a desk. Inspector Whyland seated himself at the latter,
selected one of the pens before him, and dipped it into
an inkpot, which happened to contain red ink.</p>

<p>“Now then, Mr. Copperdock,” he said. “Tell me exactly
what happened yesterday evening.”</p>

<p>The tobacconist immediately launched into an account
of his adventure. Whyland listened patiently, occasionally
making a brief note with the pen. “You say that
nobody could have entered the house while you were
out?” he asked, as Mr. Copperdock came to the end of his
story.</p>

<p>“Quite impossible,” replied Mr. Copperdock emphatically.
“There’s only one door, with a spring lock which
catches when you shuts it.”</p>

<p>“H’m. I’d like to have a look round, if you don’t mind,”
said the Inspector.</p>

<p>He examined the house carefully. On the ground floor
was the shop, and behind it the office and a little kitchen
containing a gas stove. The windows of these did not open,
and were high up in the wall, and covered with a stout iron
grating. There was no back entrance. From a narrow
passage a staircase ran up to the first floor, upon which were
two bedrooms, occupied respectively by Mr. Copperdock
and his son, and a sitting-room. The bedrooms were over
the shop, and looked out upon Praed Street. The sitting-room
was at the back, and looked out over an enclosed
yard, belonging to a transport contractor, and used for
storing vans at night. The windows on the first floor were
obviously inaccessible without the aid of a ladder. Above
the first floor were a couple of attics, lighted only by
skylights, which were closed and padlocked. From the
cobwebs which covered them, it was obvious that they had not
been opened for a long time.</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland returned to the first floor. “Were
these windows closed and fastened while you were out last
night?” he enquired.</p>

<p>“The sitting-room was,” replied Ted, who had followed
them upstairs. “I looked at it when I came in. It hasn’t
been touched since.”</p>

<p>Whyland looked at it, and satisfied himself that it
showed no signs of having been forced. “What about the
bedroom windows?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Both Dad’s and mine were open at the top,” replied
Ted. “But nobody could have got in through them, unless
they had put up a ladder in the middle of Praed Street.”</p>

<p>“Even the black sailor isn’t likely to have done that,”
observed Whyland sarcastically. “Well, Mr. Copperdock,
the best advice I can give you is not to go about alone at
night too much. I’ll have a man watch outside the premises
for a bit, if that’s any comfort to you. But, if you ask me,
I don’t think you’re in any immediate danger.”</p>

<p>It seemed that the Inspector was right. Several days
passed without anything untoward happening to Mr.
Copperdock. The tobacconist resumed his normal routine,
with the modification that he took care never to be alone.
His son walked with him as far as the Cambridge Arms,
and one at least of his cronies there walked back with him
to the shop. Mr. Ludgrove, watching with some
amusement, recognized every night the watcher that Whyland
had promised to provide. It struck him that the man’s
instructions were probably to keep an eye on Mr.
Copperdock’s movements rather than to provide for his safety.
But upon the tobacconist, who, now he had got over his
fright, appeared to regard himself as something of a hero,
the man’s presence produced an impression of importance
and of security.</p>

<p>The only aspect of the incident which appealed to
Whyland was the counter itself. He had submitted it to
the experts at Scotland Yard, together with the notes
which he had made in red ink in Mr. Copperdock’s office,
and they had given it as their opinion that the figure upon
it had been drawn with the same ink as that in which the
notes had been written, and by a similar pen. Further, this
pen and ink corresponded with those which had been used
on the previous counters, in the cases in which they had
been preserved. The more the Inspector considered it, the
more convinced he became that Mr. Copperdock was at
the bottom of the business. But how to bring it home to
him? That was the difficulty.</p>

<p>Mr. Copperdock had found the numbered counter on
Tuesday evening. On the following Saturday Ted had
arranged to take Ivy to a dance, from which he was not
likely to return until after midnight. It had been
suggested that Mr. Copperdock, in order that he should not
be left alone, should spend the time between the closing
of the Cambridge Arms and the return of his son in Mr.
Ludgrove’s sanctum.</p>

<p>But, deriving courage from the fact that four days had
elapsed without anything happening, Mr. Copperdock
refused to consider any such proposal. He must have
detected the general scepticism with which his story of the
finding of the counter had been received, and had resolved
to say no more about it. He went to the Cambridge Arms
at his usual hour, stayed there until closing time, and was
then accompanied home by two friends of his, who lived
in the Edgware Road, and who had to pass the door on
their way home. He invited these two to come in and have
a last drink with him, and they accepted, on the grounds
that it was a beautiful night, and very thirsty work
walking.</p>

<p>The story of the finding of the counter was by this
time familiar to all the clientele of the Cambridge Arms,
each individual member of which suspected some other
member of having somehow conveyed it into Mr.
Copperdock’s possession. It was absurd to think, as one of them
remarked in his absence, that anybody could have a grudge
against Sam Copperdock. Somebody must be pulling his
leg, that was the only possible explanation. It was with
some considerable interest, therefore, that his two friends
followed the tobacconist as he took them into his bedroom
and showed them the exact place where he found the
counter.</p>

<p>It was not until nearly eleven that Mr. Copperdock’s
party broke up. Inspector Whyland’s deputy, strolling
past on the other side of the road, noticed the parting on
the doorstep, and observed that after the departure of
his friends, Mr. Copperdock shut the door of his shop.
A few minutes later he saw a light switched on in one
of the front rooms upstairs. This he knew, from his
experience of previous nights, was the signal that Mr.
Copperdock was going to bed.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove, since the tobacconist had refused his
offer of hospitality, spent the evening by himself. The
room above his shop was littered with innumerable boxes
containing all manner of dried herbs and similar items
of the stock-in-trade of his calling. He spent several hours
between that room and his sanctum. His work bench
became strewed with specimens to which from time to time
he affixed labels with high-sounding names. The door of
his shop was ajar until about half-past ten, up till which
hour an occasional customer interrupted his labours. After
that time it was closed, and he was able to devote his whole
attention to his plants.</p>

<p>He was still working at midnight. He appeared to
require very little sleep, and rarely went to bed before the
early hours of the morning. He had just brewed himself
a cup of his favourite cocoa, when suddenly he heard a
violent hammering upon the door of the shop.
Instinctively he glanced at the clock upon the mantelpiece. The
hands pointed to twenty minutes past twelve.</p>

<p>Surely no customer could be seeking admittance at such
an hour! Besides, the knocking was clamorous, insistent,
not in the least like the furtive taps which usually
proclaimed the visit of some client, anxious to hide his errand
under the cover of darkness. With a shrug of his shoulders
Mr. Ludgrove put down his cup and went to the door. He
drew back the bolts and put out his head, to find Ted
Copperdock standing on the pavement outside.</p>

<p>The young man gave him no chance to ask questions.
He threw out his hand and caught Mr. Ludgrove by the
arm, as though to drag him forcibly into the street. “For
God’s sake come and see Dad!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>“Why, what has happened?” enquired Mr. Ludgrove
quickly.</p>

<p>“I don’t know, he’s dead, I think,” replied Ted
incoherently. “I’ve just come back and found him.
Something terrible’s happened——”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove was not the man to be carried off his feet
by a sudden crisis. “Certainly, Ted, I’ll come over,” he
said quietly. “But you appear to want a doctor rather than
me. You probably know that a detective has been
patrolling the streets for the last few nights. I think I see him
coming towards us now. You go and fetch the doctor, while
he and I attend to your father.”</p>

<p>Ted, after a moment’s hesitation, ran off down the road,
and Mr. Ludgrove walked swiftly towards the advancing
figure, which he had already recognized. “Something has
happened to Mr. Copperdock,” he said as he reached him.
“I have sent his son for a doctor, and said that you and
I would go in.”</p>

<p>“Something happened, eh?” replied the man, as the two
strode swiftly towards the door of the tobacconist’s shop.
“You don’t know what it is, I suppose? I’ve had my eye
on the place all the evening, and there’s been nobody near
it between eleven, when two fellows whom Copperdock
took in came out, and five minutes ago, when his son let
himself in with a key. And there’s been a light in the front
window upstairs all that time.”</p>

<p>“No, I know nothing,” replied Mr. Ludgrove anxiously.
They had reached the shop by this time. The door had
been left open by Ted in his haste to call the herbalist,
and they hurried on through the shop and up the
staircase to the first floor. The door of Mr. Copperdock’s
bedroom stood open, and they rushed in together. On the
threshold they halted, moved by a simultaneous impulse.
Before them, in the middle of the floor, lay Mr.
Copperdock, stripped to the waist, with an expression of innocent
surprise upon his face.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch12">

<h2>Chapter XII. <br/> A Hypodermic Needle</h2>

<p>For a moment the two men stood still, rooted to the
ground with horror. Then Mr. Ludgrove stepped forward
and fell on his knees by Mr. Copperdock’s side. He put
his finger on his wrist for a moment, then slowly rose to
his feet and shook his head.</p>

<p>“Dead?” said the detective enquiringly. “By jove, this
is a bad business. Will you stay here for a moment while
I go down into the shop and telephone? I’ll ring up the
station and get them to send for Whyland. Don’t touch
anything, whatever you do.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded. He stood motionless in the
door-way when voices below proclaimed the arrival on the scene
of Ted and the doctor. The detective, who had sent his
message, came upstairs with them, and the three joined
Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>The doctor took in the situation at a glance. Mr.
Copperdock was lying on his back, his legs drawn up
close to his body. The doctor examined him in silence for
awhile, then beckoned to the detective.</p>

<p>“I don’t understand this at all,” he said. “I shall have to
make a more thorough examination than is possible while
he is lying in this position. I’m afraid there’s nothing to be
done. I don’t want to move him until your Inspector
comes. He won’t be long, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“He’s living close to the station,” replied the detective.
“They’ve sent a man with a motor-cycle and side-car
round to fetch him and bring him here. It oughtn’t to take
him more than a few minutes. I’d rather you waited, if
you don’t mind.”</p>

<p>The doctor nodded and continued his examination, while
the other three stood where they were, looking keenly
about them. It was obvious that when death overtook Mr.
Copperdock he had been preparing for bed. His coat,
waistcoat, shirt and vest lay on a chair, and the basin on
the washing stand was half full of soapy water. A towel
lay on the floor near it.</p>

<p>The minutes seemed to pass with leaden slowness until
a faint throbbing reached their ears, which rapidly grew
in intensity until it resolved itself into the sound of a
motor-cycle. The noise ceased suddenly as it reached the
door, and in a few seconds Inspector Whyland appeared,
half dressed, with a stern expression on his face.</p>

<p>“How did this happen, Waters?” he enquired sharply,
turning to the detective.</p>

<p>“I don’t know, sir,” replied the latter. “I’ve been
watching the house all the evening——”</p>

<p>“Well, never mind, you can tell me about that later,”
interrupted Whyland. “Good evening, doctor. Can you
tell me what this man died of?”</p>

<p>“No, I can’t” replied the doctor. “It looks as if he had
been bitten by a snake, or something of that kind. I was
waiting till you came to make a thorough examination.”</p>

<p>“Right. Stand fast a minute while I look round.” He
made a swift survey of the room, then, taking a piece of
chalk from his pocket, marked on the carpet the position
in which the body was lying.</p>

<p>“Now then, doctor, I’m ready,” he said. “What do you
want to do?”</p>

<p>“I want him laid on his side, if you’ll bear a hand,”
replied the doctor. “That’s right. Hullo, look at that!”</p>

<p>They had moved Mr. Copperdock’s body until his back
was visible. There, just below the left shoulder-blade, was
an almost circular patch, covered with a curious white
powdery incrustation. In the centre of this patch was an
angry looking purple spot.</p>

<p>The doctor bent over this and uttered an exclamation
of amazement. Opening the case which he had laid down
by his side he took from it a pair of forceps, and applied
them to the spot on Mr. Copperdock’s back. From this
he withdrew something, which he carried over to the light,
and beckoned to Whyland to inspect.</p>

<p>“See that?” he said. “That’s the end of a fine
hypodermic needle. I’m beginning to see what happened, now.
He was injected with some powerful toxic agent by means
of a hypodermic syringe, the needle of which broke off in
the process. The nature of the poison we shall be able to
determine by an examination of this fragment. But I
don’t understand that white incrustation. Let me have
another look at it.”</p>

<p>He selected a small phial from his case, put the
fragment of the needle into it, and labelled it. Then he turned
once more to Mr. Copperdock’s body, and examined the
patch once more with a lens. Finally he removed some of
the white powder and put it in another phial, which he
also sealed and labelled.</p>

<p>Then he beckoned Whyland aside, and the two
conversed for a moment in low whispers.</p>

<p>“This is really most extraordinary,” said the doctor.
“This man undoubtedly died from an injection of poison
administered hypodermically. You remember the case of
Colburn, the baker, last year?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I remember it well,” replied Whyland. “What
about it, doctor?”</p>

<p>“Well, of course, I can’t say definitely as yet,” replied
the doctor guardedly. “But it seems to me that the
symptoms in the two cases are remarkably similar. I would go
so far as to hazard the opinion that the same poison was
employed in both cases. Now, in the present case, you, I
take it, are chiefly interested in the agency by which the
poison was administered. Well, it is possible that in this
case it was self-administered. One can just manage to run
a hypodermic needle into oneself below the left shoulder-blade.
Here’s a syringe. There’s no needle in it. Hold it
in your left hand. That’s right. Now, see if you can
press the nozzle against your back in the place
corresponding to the spot on Mr. Copperdock’s body.”</p>

<p>Whyland obeyed, and after some fumbling contrived
to reach the exact spot. “Yes, it can be done, but it’s
precious awkward,” he remarked, handing the syringe
back.</p>

<p>“Exactly,” agreed the doctor. “That may account for
the needle having broken off. Mind, I’m only suggesting
a possibility, not laying down a theory. That’s your job.
Now we come to the white incrustation round the
puncture. Unless I’m greatly mistaken, it is potassium
carbonate. Should it prove to be so, the fact would be of
considerable significance.”</p>

<p>“Why?” enquired Whyland. “I’m afraid I don’t quite
follow you, doctor.”</p>

<p>“Potassium carbonate has no particular properties of
its own,” replied the doctor. “But, if a piece of caustic
potash had been applied to the puncture, say an hour or
two ago, it would by now have been converted into
potassium carbonate. You see what this suggests. Caustic
substances are employed to burn out poisoned surfaces. In
this case, caustic potash may have been employed in an
attempt to counteract the poison. Of course, it would be
ineffectual, as it had been injected far too deeply. But
that it has been so applied I am pretty certain. You can
see for yourself that the skin shows traces of burning
under the incrustation. Whether the same hand that
injected the poison applied this ineffectual antidote, I cannot
say.”</p>

<p>Whyland nodded, and then a sudden thought struck
him. “But look here, if he injected the poison himself, the
syringe ought to be lying about somewhere!” he exclaimed.
“How long would it take for the poison to act, doctor?”</p>

<p>The doctor shook his head. “I can’t say, since I do
not yet know its nature,” he replied. “If it was the same as
was employed in Colburn’s case, we can make a rough
guess, however. A very small quantity, applied to a scratch
in his tongue, caused death in two hours and a half. We
may assume that very much larger quantity would be
contained in a syringe, and it was driven well into the
tissues. Death might well have occurred within a few
minutes. But in any case, there would have been time to
dispose of the syringe.”</p>

<p>The doctor turned and pointed to the window. “That’s
open at the top, as you see, and the curtains do not meet
by a couple of feet or more. He could have thrown it out
there without the slightest difficulty.”</p>

<p>Whyland turned to the three men, who had been standing
by the door. “Slip down below, Waters, and search the
pavement and roadway outside this window for a
hypodermic syringe,” he said. “Sharp, now! Mr. Ludgrove,
come to this window for a moment; you know this street
better than I do. That’s your place opposite, isn’t it?
What’s behind that window over the shop?”</p>

<p>“A room I use for storing herbs in,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove. “As it happens, I have been in there once or twice
this evening.”</p>

<p>“You didn’t see anything of what was happening in
here, I suppose?” asked Whyland quickly.</p>

<p>“No, I did not,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “I was only in
the room for a moment or two, selecting bundles of herbs
to take downstairs. I did happen to notice about eleven
o’clock that there was a light in here, but that was all.”</p>

<p>“What about the windows to the right and left of your
place?”</p>

<p>“I believe that they belong to offices occupied only in
the day-time. I do not think it at all likely that anyone
could have overlooked this room from them at night.”</p>

<p>“No,” agreed Whyland. “We’re not likely to be lucky
to find an actual witness. All right, Mr. Ludgrove, thank
you. Now, young man, do you know if your father
possessed a hypodermic syringe?”</p>

<p>Ted Copperdock, thus addressed, shook his head. “I
don’t think so, Inspector,” he replied. “But I shouldn’t
know one if I saw it. There’s a cupboard over there by the
washing stand where he kept a lot of bottles of stuff.”</p>

<p>Whyland strode over to the cupboard and opened it.
It contained about a dozen bottles of various sizes, each
half full of some patent medicine or other. But of a
hypodermic syringe, or even any caustic potash, there was
no trace.</p>

<p>“If he did it himself he must have thrown the syringe
away,” muttered Whyland. “Waters ought to find it;
there isn’t a lot of traffic along here at this time of night.
Well, doctor, I don’t think we need keep you out of bed
any longer. I’ll have the body taken to the mortuary, and
perhaps you’ll ring me up at the station later in the
morning?”</p>

<p>The doctor nodded, picked up his bag, which contained
the broken needle and the sample of the incrustation, and
left the house. When he had gone, Whyland turned once
again to Ted.</p>

<p>“Can you suggest any reason why your father should
wish to take his life?” he enquired.</p>

<p>“No, Inspector, I can’t,” replied Ted frankly. “The
business is doing very well, and father was only saying
the other day that we’d got a tidy bit put away in the
bank. I keep the books myself, and I know everything’s
all right.”</p>

<p>“I see. No money troubles, in fact. You don’t know of
any disappointment which he may have experienced, or
anything like that?”</p>

<p>A faint smile passed across Ted’s face. “I don’t think
he had any disappointment, Inspector,” he replied. “In
fact, I should say it was rather the other way.”</p>

<p>“What do you mean?” said Whyland sharply.</p>

<p>“Why, he always reckoned that nobody knew, but I
fancy that we all guessed sharp enough. He’s hinted to
me once or twice lately that he wasn’t too old to marry
again. And——well, from what her daughter lets drop,
Mrs. Tovey wouldn’t mind. He went round there pretty
often, and she always seemed glad to see him.”</p>

<p>Whyland shot a quick glance at Mr. Ludgrove. It was
from him that he had first learnt of this attachment.
Ludgrove nodded almost imperceptibly, and Whyland
turned once more to Ted.</p>

<p>“There was nothing preying on his mind, was there?”
he asked.</p>

<p>“Well, I’ve thought sometimes that he fair had the
wind up about this black sailor,” replied Ted reluctantly.
“I never knew what to make of that. He told me one day
that he’d met him coming out of the Cambridge Arms,
but I never could quite believe it somehow.”</p>

<p>“As it happens, I share your scepticism,” said
Whyland. “Mr. Ludgrove here was in the street at the time,
and saw your father come out of the Cambridge Arms.
There was nobody but himself and your father in sight,
he assures me.”</p>

<p>“That is so,” assented Mr. Ludgrove gravely.</p>

<p>“Well, I’m not surprised,” said Ted. “It’s a funny
thing, but these things always happen when he’d been to
the Cambridge Arms of an evening. It was when he came
home from there that he found that counter the other
day?”</p>

<p>“Have you ever seen your father definitely under the
influence of liquor?” asked Whyland.</p>

<p>“Why no, not to say actually squiffy. He’d talk freer
than usual, and imagine all sorts of yarns about things
that never happened. I think he got the black sailor on
his brain sometimes. When he first got the counter he
made up his mind that the black sailor was going to get
him. But the last day or two he’s been much more cheerful.
Of course, it’s possible that this evening, when he was
alone, it got on his mind again.”</p>

<p>The conversation was interrupted by the return of
Waters, the detective. “I’ve searched as best I can for that
syringe, sir, and I can’t find it,” he reported. “I’ll have
another good look as soon as it gets light, if you like,
sir.”</p>

<p>“Yes, do,” replied Whyland. “Now, you were supposed
to be watching this place all the evening. What time did
Mr. Copperdock come in?”</p>

<p>“Between nine and ten, sir. Two fellows came with him,
and the three stood talking at the door for a minute or
two. Then they all went in, and the door was shut behind
them. It was close on eleven when it opened again, and
the two men came out. Mr. Copperdock came downstairs
with them, I saw him just inside the door talking to them.
Then they went away, and the door was shut again. A few
minutes after they had gone I saw a light come on in this
room.”</p>

<p>“You can’t see into the room from the opposite
pavement, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Only a bit of ceiling, sir. I noticed the window was
open at the top, and the curtains not properly drawn, like
you see them now, sir. They’ve never been properly drawn
since I’ve been watching the house. The next thing that
happened was that Mr. Copperdock’s son came along at
about a quarter past twelve, and let himself in with a key.”</p>

<p>Inspector Whyland turned to Ted. “What time did you
go out?” he asked.</p>

<p>“About eight o’clock. Dad was just getting ready to go
round to the Cambridge Arms.”</p>

<p>“Where were you between eight and a quarter past
twelve?”</p>

<p>“With Miss Tovey,” replied Ted, readily enough, but
with an awkward blush. “We went to a dance, then we
had some supper. After that I saw her home, and stayed
there a few minutes. I walked home from Lisson Grove,
found Dad like this, and ran straight across to fetch Mr.
Ludgrove.”</p>

<p>“Nobody but you and your father had a key to the
premises, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“No. One of us always came down to let the charwoman
in in the morning.”</p>

<p>“You are perfectly certain, Waters, that nobody came
to the house between eleven and a quarter past twelve?”
enquired Whyland.</p>

<p>“Certain, sir. I was in the street outside all the time,
and never took my eyes off the place.”</p>

<p>“Very well. You stay here with the body. I’ll arrange
for it to be taken to the mortuary as soon as I can.
As for you, young man, you had better go to bed and try
to get some sleep. We shall want you in the morning.
Mr. Ludgrove, if you’ve nothing better to do, I should like
you to come round the house with me. I want to make
certain that nobody can have broken in.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove nodded, and the two left the room
together. Whyland examined the sitting-room window. It
was shut and fastened, and bore no traces of violence.
Then they went downstairs and looked over the ground
floor, without discovering anything in any way out of the
ordinary.</p>

<p>When they reached the office behind the shop,
Whyland closed the door and sank wearily into a chair. “Well,
Mr. Ludgrove, what do you make of it?” he said.</p>

<p>“I couldn’t help overhearing snatches of your
conversation with the doctor,” replied the herbalist. “I confess
that I cannot understand why, if Mr. Copperdock wished
to poison himself with a hypodermic injection, he should
select his back for the purpose, unless he had some
confused idea of a lumbar puncture. Yet, on the other hand,
he is not likely to have let someone else drive a needle into
him without a struggle, and of that there is no trace, so
far as I could see.”</p>

<p>“And how did that person get in?” put in Whyland
quickly. “That is, if both Waters and young Ted are
telling the truth. Waters is a good man, and I haven’t the
least reason to suspect him. But it’s just possible that he
was dozing somewhere between eleven and twelve, and
that Ted came home before he said he did. His father
wouldn’t be surprised to see him, and he might have
walked up behind him and jabbed the needle in. Then,
when his father found out what he’d done, he got a bit of
caustic potash from somewhere and clapped it on. I know
there are lots of difficulties, but at least it’s possible. At
all events, I can’t think of another alternative to the
suicide theory.”</p>

<p>“The case is extraordinarily puzzling,” said Mr.
Ludgrove sympathetically. “If you feel disposed to discuss
it, Inspector, I suggest that you do so in comfort over at
my place. I can make you a cup of cocoa, or, if you prefer
it, I can supply you with something stronger. I always
kept a bottle of whiskey in reserve for poor Mr.
Copperdock.”</p>

<p>“Well, it’s very good of you, Mr. Ludgrove,” replied
Whyland gratefully. “What’s the time? After two? I want
to stay about here until it’s light. I’ll just tell Waters
where I’m to be found in case he wants me. Then I shall
be very glad to accept your kind hospitality.”</p>

<p>He left the room and returned after an absence of a
couple of minutes. “I can’t make it out,” he said. “Waters
swears he never had his eyes off the place. Still, it won’t do
any harm to make enquiries into young Ted’s movements
and verify his statement. It beats me, but then everything
Copperdock did was a puzzle. His name seemed to crop
up in connection with each of these deaths, somehow. Then
there was that yarn about the black sailor, the counter
which he said he found on his bed, and now his amazing
death. Well, I’m ready to go across if you are, Mr.
Ludgrove.”</p>

<p>The two passed through the shop into the road. As
they crossed it, Mr. Ludgrove uttered an exclamation of
surprise. “Why, the door of my shop is open!” he said.
“I must have forgotten to shut it in my haste when Ted
Copperdock came over for me.”</p>

<p>“Let’s hope no inquisitive visitor has been in to have
a look round while we’ve been over the way,” replied
Whyland.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. “He will have found very little
of value to reward him if he has,” he said. “No, I’m not
afraid of burglars. In any case, it’s a very old-fashioned
lock which anyone could force without any difficulty.”</p>

<p>They had reached the door by now, and Mr. Ludgrove
pushed it open. “Come along, Inspector, we’ll go into the
back room,” he said, leading the way.</p>

<p>At the door of the inner room he paused, and switched
on the light. At a first glance, the room appeared to be
exactly as he had left it to answer Ted’s urgent summons.
Then suddenly he clutched Whyland’s arm, and pointed
straight in front of him with a shaking finger.</p>

<p>On the mantelpiece, propped conspicuously against the
clock so that it could not fail to attract attention, was a
white bone counter, upon which the figure VII had been
carefully traced.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="partition" id="part2">

<h2>Part II. <br/> The Criminal</h2>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch13">

<h2>Chapter XIII. <br/> Enter Dr. Priestley</h2>

<p>That eccentric scientist, Dr. Priestley, sat in his study on
the Monday morning following the death of Mr. Copperdock,
busily engaged in sorting out a mass of untidy-looking
papers. Most of them he tore up and placed in
the waste-paper basket by his side; a few he glanced at
and put aside. The April sun lit up the room with a pale
radiance, lending an air of Spring even to this dignified
but rather gloomy house in Westbourne Terrace.</p>

<p>Dr. Priestley was thus engaged when the door opened
and his secretary, Harold Merefield, came into the room.
There was an air of heaviness about both men, the old
and the young, as though the Spring had not yet touched
them, and Winter held them still in its grip. One might
have guessed that some absorbing work had monopolized
their energies, leaving them no leisure for anything but
the utmost concentration. And one would have guessed
right. For the last six months Dr. Priestley had been
engaged upon the writing of a book which was to enhance
his already brilliant reputation. Its title was <i>Some Aspects
of Modern Thought</i>, and in it Dr. Priestley had, with his
usual incontrovertible logic, shattered the majority of the
pet theories of orthodox science. It was, as the reviews
were to say, a brilliant achievement, all the more
entertaining from the vein of biting sarcasm which ran
through it.</p>

<p>When Dr. Priestley settled down to writing a book, he
concentrated his whole attention upon it, to the exclusion
of everything else. He allowed nothing whatever to
distract his mind, even for a few minutes. He lived entirely
in his subject, refusing even to read the newspapers,
except certain scientific periodicals which might happen to
contain something relevant to the work he had in hand.
As he expected his secretary to follow his example, it was
hardly to be wondered at that both of them looked jaded
and worn out.</p>

<p>“I took the manuscript to the Post Office myself, sir,”
said Harold Merefield listlessly. “Here is the registration
receipt.”</p>

<p>“Excellent, my boy, excellent,” replied the Professor,
looking up. “So the work is finished at last, eh? I have
been destroying such notes as we shall not require again.
The rest you can file at your leisure. Dear me, you look
as if you needed a change of occupation.”</p>

<p>He stared at his secretary through his spectacles, as
though he had seen him that morning for the first time
for many months. “Yes, I think we both need a change
of occupation,” he continued. “I feel that I should
welcome some enticing problem, mathematical or human.
It is time we stepped from our recent absorption back
into the world. Let me see. What is the date?”</p>

<p>“April 28th, sir,” replied Harold with a smile. He knew
well enough that the Professor would have accepted any
other day he chose to mention.</p>

<p>“Dear me! Then the world is six months older than
when we retired from it. No doubt many interesting
problems have arisen in the interval, but I fear that their
solutions lie in other hands than ours. By the way, when
does our friend Inspector Hanslet return from America?”</p>

<p>Harold turned to one of the big presses which lined
the walls of the room, and took from it a folder marked
“Inspector Hanslet.” He consulted this for a moment, then
looked up towards his employer. “At the end of this month,
sir. There is no definite date mentioned. I dare say he is
in London already.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps so,” agreed the Professor. “It does not really
matter. My thoughts turned to him naturally, as to one
who has in the past supplied us with some very
satisfactory problems. Well, we must be patient, my boy. I
have no doubt that we shall very soon succeed in finding
some congenial work with which to occupy our minds.”</p>

<p>He returned to the business of sorting his papers, while
Harold sat down at the table reserved for his use,
thankful to be able to do absolutely nothing for a few minutes.
His idea of a change of occupation was not to plunge at
once into some abstruse mathematical investigation which
would involve him in the writing up of endless notes. If
only Hanslet would come back and divert the Professor’s
thoughts into some other channel! But of Hanslet, since
he had departed for New York during the previous year
to co-operate with the American police in running to earth
a gang of international swindlers, nothing had been heard.</p>

<p>Inspector Hanslet was rapidly becoming the foremost
figure at Scotland Yard. He was a man who, without
being brilliant, possessed more than the usual quickness
of perception. He could, in his own phrase, see as far
through a brick wall as most people, and to this attribute
he added an agility of mind remarkable in a man whose
training had been of a stereotyped kind. Early in his
career he had become acquainted with Dr. Priestley, and
the Professor, to whom a problem of any kind was as the
breath of his body, had since encouraged him to come to
Westbourne Terrace and discuss his difficulties. To many
of these the Professor’s logical mind had suggested the
solution. Since he refused to allow his name to be
mentioned, the credit for his deductions descended upon
Hanslet. As a matter of fact, the authorities knew very well
how matters stood, and Hanslet was always employed
upon those cases which promised to be complicated, since
it was an open secret that he could call upon the advice
and assistance of Dr. Priestley.</p>

<p>It was evident that the sudden reaction of having
nothing to do, after his unremitting labours of the past
six months, was having an unfavourable effect upon Dr.
Priestley’s temper. He roamed about the study, pulling
out a file from time to time, and finding fault with Harold
because some item did not come immediately to his hand.
It was not until it was time to dress for dinner that he
desisted from this irritating occupation. And even at
dinner he was silent and morose, obviously seeking in vain
for some new interest which should occupy his restless
thoughts. But hardly had he and Harold finished their
coffee, which they always had in the study after dinner,
than Mary the parlourmaid opened the door softly.
“Inspector Hanslet to see you, sir,” she announced.</p>

<p>The Professor turned so abruptly in his chair as
seriously to endanger the coffee cup he was holding.
“Inspector Hanslet!” he exclaimed. “Why show him in, of
course. Good evening, Inspector, it was only this morning
that Harold and I were speaking of you. I hope that you
enjoyed yourself in America.”</p>

<p>“I did indeed, Professor,” replied Hanslet, shaking
hands warmly with Dr. Priestley, and nodding cheerily to
Harold. “Not that I’m not very glad to be home again;
one’s own country’s best, after all. I landed at
Southampton last Wednesday.”</p>

<p>“And now you have come back to tell us of your
experiences,” said the Professor. “I am sure we shall be most
interested to hear them. Did you succeed in your object?”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, we rounded them up all right,” replied
Hanslet. “My word, Professor, you ought to go over to New
York and see the things the fellows do over there. As far
as scientific detection goes, they’ve got us beat to a frazzle.
You’d appreciate their methods. And they’re a cheery
crowd, too. They gave me no end of a good time while I
was over there.”</p>

<p>“Well, sit down, and tell us all about it,” said the
Professor, motioning Hanslet towards a comfortable chair.
“You will relieve the tedium I am feeling at having
nothing to do.”</p>

<p>Hanslet sat down, and, as he did so, looked enquiringly
at the Professor. “You say you’ve nothing to do, sir?
Well, I’m very glad to hear that. The truth is that I
didn’t come here to tell you my experiences. As a matter
of fact, I meant to take a month’s leave when I got back,
but the Chief asked me to wait a bit and take over a case
which has been puzzling the Yard for several months. And
I wanted to ask your advice, if you would be good enough
to listen.”</p>

<p>The Professor rubbed his hands together briskly.
“Excellent, excellent!” he exclaimed. “I told you this
morning, Harold, that a problem was bound to turn up before
long. By all means tell me your difficulties, Inspector. But
let me beg of you to keep to facts, and not to digress into
conjecture.”</p>

<p>Hanslet smiled. The Professor’s passion for facts was
well-known to him from past experience. “Well, I
expect you know as much about it as I do,” he began.
“Ever since Tovey the greengrocer was killed last
November, there’s been a lot in the papers——”</p>

<p>But the Professor interrupted him. “I should perhaps
have explained, Inspector, that since last October I have
scarcely opened a newspaper. My whole mind has been
concentrated upon a task which is now happily finished.
The name of Tovey the greengrocer is, I regret to say,
utterly unfamiliar to me. I should be glad if you would
treat me as one who has only lately reached this world
from the planet Mars, and give me the facts without
presuming that I have any previous knowledge of them.”</p>

<p>“Very well, Professor,” replied Hanslet. “You must
have heard of a series of deaths under peculiar
circumstances which have occurred in Praed Street, not half a
mile away from here? Why, I read about them in New
York! They caused a great sensation.”</p>

<p>“I am not concerned with popular sensations,” said the
Professor coldly. “I admit that some rumours of such
happenings penetrated the isolation with which I have
endeavoured to surround myself, but I dismissed them from
my mind as likely to introduce a disturbing factor. I
repeat that you had better repeat the facts, as briefly as
possible.”</p>

<p>“Very well, Professor, I will tell you the story exactly
as it was told to me at the Yard,” replied Hanslet. “You
will be able to see how much is fact and how much
conjecture. As I was not on the spot myself, I cannot vouch
for the details. Will that do?”</p>

<p>The Professor nodded, and turned to Harold. “Make
a note of the names and dates mentioned by Inspector
Hanslet,” he said. “Now, Inspector, you may proceed.”</p>

<p>Hanslet, whose memory for names and facts was rarely
at fault, recounted as briefly as he could the course of
events from the murder of Mr. Tovey in November, to
the finding of Martin’s body in the cellar of Number 407,
in January. The Professor interrupted him now and then
to ask a question, but in the main he allowed him to tell
the story in his own way. When he had finished, and the
Professor had expressed himself satisfied, Hanslet
continued.</p>

<p>“The man who’s been in charge of the case is a fellow
called Whyland, keen enough on his job, but a bit
lacking in imagination. I had a chat with him yesterday, and
he confessed that he was completely at the end of his
tether. Up till last Saturday evening, he told me, he was
pretty sure that he could lay his hand on the criminal,
but that night something happened which entirely upset
his calculations.”</p>

<p>“What was that?” enquired the Professor, who was
listening intently.</p>

<p>“Why, for one thing, the man whom he suspected of
the murders has been killed,” replied Hanslet. “Not that
there was anything amazing in that, for he seems to have
been a trifle unbalanced in any case, and his death may
possibly have been due to suicide. No, what altogether
upset Whyland’s apple-cart was that another man received
a counter, some time after the death of the man whom
Whyland suspected of delivering them.”</p>

<p>“It is remarkable how frequently hypotheses founded
upon pure conjecture are upset by one simple fact,”
remarked the Professor acidly. “Now, what was the name
of this man whom Whyland suspected, and who so
inconsiderately spoilt the theory by his premature death?”</p>

<p>“Samuel Copperdock,” replied Hanslet, turning to
Harold, who wrote the name on his pad.</p>

<p>“Copperdock?” repeated the Professor. “An unusual
name, and yet I seem to have heard it before in some
connection. Copperdock, Copperdock! Let me think——”</p>

<p>“You’ve probably seen the name above his shop,
Professor,” said Hanslet. “He was a tobacconist in Praed
Street. Or you may have seen it some months ago in the
paper. He was a witness at the inquest on Tovey, who was
the first man murdered.”</p>

<p>But the Professor shook his head. “No, if my memory
serves me, I heard the name many years ago, in some
connection which escapes me for the moment. However, the
point would not appear to have any importance. I must
apologize for interrupting you, Inspector. You were
saying that another man received a counter after this man
Copperdock’s death, but I do not think you mentioned his
name?”</p>

<p>“Ludgrove. Elmer Ludgrove,” said Hanslet. “Rather an
interesting personality, from what Whyland tells me. He
keeps a herbalist’s shop, and is a bit of a character in his
way. He’s a man of some education, between fifty and
sixty, a very dignified old boy with a striking white beard,
which I expect is a bit of an asset in his trade. He doesn’t
say much about himself, but does a lot of good in his own
quiet way. All the poorer people in the neighbourhood
come to him if they’re in any sort of trouble, and he freely
admits he hears a good many secrets. Whyland thought he
would be a useful chap to get on the right side of, and
often used to drop in to see him. He says he got more than
one valuable hint from him. He was also pretty certain
that this chap Ludgrove shared his suspicions of
Copperdock, but he would never say so outright. You see,
Copperdock was a friend of his.”</p>

<p>The Professor nodded. “I see,” he said. “And it was this
Mr. Ludgrove who received the counter you say?”</p>

<p>“Yes, and, what’s more, Whyland was with him when
he found it. The poor old boy was terribly shaken for the
moment, Whyland says, but after a bit he pretended to
treat it as a joke. I’ve seen him since, and he’s pretty
plucky about it, knowing as he does that everybody who
has received one of these infernal numbered counters has
died a sudden death. He says that he is an old man,
anyhow, alone in the world and with only a few more years to
live in any case, so that his death will be no great blow to
anybody.”</p>

<p>“A most philosophic attitude,” agreed the Professor.
“But to return to Mr. Copperdock, I should like to hear
the circumstances under which he met his death.”</p>

<p>Hanslet related the events of the previous Saturday
night in considerable detail, up to the time when Whyland
and Ludgrove entered the latter’s sanctum. “There’s not
much more to add,” he continued, “except that the doctor’s
suspicions were confirmed as to the poison. The Home
Office people examined the fragment of broken needle,
and I heard this afternoon that they found traces of a
remarkable virulent synthetic alkaloid. You’ll know what
that is better than I do, Professor.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know,” replied the Professor grimly. “I have
reason to. It was with one of these synthetic
alkaloids—there are a number of them—that Farwell tipped the
spines of the hedgehog to which I so nearly fell a
victim.<a href="#note" id="noteref" class="pginternal">¹</a>
You remember that incident, I dare say?”</p>

<p>“I do, indeed,” said Hanslet warmly. “What’s more,
the Home Office people say that a dose of the stuff would
produce almost immediate paralysis, and death within a
few minutes. The incrustation was potassium carbonate
all right, almost certainly the result of putting caustic
potash on the place. But that only makes the business
more puzzling. If Copperdock poisoned himself, how did
he have time to apply the caustic potash before he was
paralysed? If someone else did it, why should they apply
the caustic, and how did they get in and out of the house?
Remember, Whyland’s man Waters had the place under
observation all the time.”</p>

<p>“Then you are inclined to favour the theory of suicide?”
asked the Professor.</p>

<p>“On the whole, yes,” replied Hanslet. “Oh, by the way,
I forgot to tell you that soon after daylight Waters found
the syringe, with the other part of the needle still in it,
by the side of the road under Copperdock’s window. There
had been a heavy shower of rain about half past three, and
the syringe was covered with mud and filth. The analysts
could not find any traces remaining of the poison, but
the end of the needle proved that it was the one that had
been used. That points to suicide, a murderer wouldn’t
chuck away his weapon like that where anyone could
see it.</p>

<p>“Besides, if you come to think of it, suicide fits in best
with what we know. It is a fact that Copperdock’s mind
was to some extent unhinged. He declared that he met the
black sailor, when a reliable witness declares that no such
person was about. In fact, the only person besides Copperdock
who seriously claims to have seen this black sailor is
a degenerate youth who is also a convicted pick-pocket.
It is highly probable that the counters were numbered, and
the envelopes containing them typed in Mr. Copperdock’s
office. Whyland assures me that the only link between the
victims was Copperdock, not in any definite form, certainly,
but still definite enough to make the coincidence
remarkable. I am inclined to believe that Copperdock was
at the bottom of it all somehow. My difficulty will be to
prove it.”</p>

<p>“You think, I gather, that this Mr. Copperdock suffered
from a peculiar form of homicidal mania, which finally
culminated in his taking his own life?” suggested the
Professor. “I admit that such cases are not unknown, but
the theory involves you in many difficulties. I mention only
one of them, the first that occurs to me. Where did he
obtain this synthetic alkaloid? These substances are not
articles of commerce, they are not, so far as I am aware,
used in medicine. They are only produced experimentally
in research laboratories. Farwell had a well-equipped
laboratory, as you probably remember, which accounts for
his use of such a poison. But how could a man in
Copperdock’s position procure it?”</p>

<p>Hanslet shrugged his shoulders. “I don’t know,
Professor,” he replied. “I confess that I turn to the theory of
Copperdock as the murderer because it seems to present
fewer difficulties than any other. The whole thing seems
to me to involve a mass of contradictions, whichever way
you look at it. It’s for that very reason I came to see you,
Professor. But you must at least admit that madness in
some form must be responsible. What rational motive
could there be for the murder of half a dozen men entirely
unconnected with one another, and whose deaths could be
of no possible benefit to the murderer?”</p>

<p>“I am prepared to admit nothing until I have further
examined the facts,” replied the Professor severely. “Now,
Harold, will you read me your notes upon the first
murder? Thank you. I should like all details relating to Mr.
Tovey, please, Inspector.”</p>

<p>It was long past midnight before they reached the
end of the catalogue, and the Professor was satisfied that
he knew everything which Hanslet could tell him.</p>

<p>“You will, of course, let me know if any fresh facts
come to light,” he said, as Hanslet rose to take his leave.
“Meanwhile, I will consider the matter. If I come to any
definite conclusions I will let you know. Good-night, and
pray accept my most sincere thanks for presenting me
with a most absorbing problem.”</p>

<p class="footnote" id="note">¹ See <i>The Ellerby Case</i> by John
Rhode. <a href="#noteref" class="pginternal">↩︎</a></p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch14">

<h2>Chapter XIV. <br/> The Morlandson Trial</h2>

<p>The Professor came down to breakfast next morning
looking even more weary than on the previous day.
Harold, looking at him anxiously, guessed that he had
hardly slept at all during the night. Some absorbing train
of thought, whether started by Hanslet’s story of the
previous evening or not, had taken possession of his brain.
But, in spite of his weariness, there was a queer gleam
in the piercing eyes behind the powerful spectacles, which
Harold knew from past experience to be the light of
battle.</p>

<p>“I have some work for you to-day, my boy,” he said,
as soon as the meal was over. “I want you to go to the
British Museum and look up the reports of the trials for
murder at the Old Bailey during the first ten years of the
present century. Among them you will find the trial of a
doctor for the murder of one of his patients by giving him
an overdose of morphia. I believe that the doctor’s name
began with an M, and I fancy that his patient had a title.
More than this I cannot tell you, my memory, I regret to
say, is not what it used to be. I want you to make a
précis of that trial and of the sentence.”</p>

<p>“Very good, sir,” replied Harold, and forthwith started
on his quest. He could not guess the purpose for which the
Professor required this information, but it could obviously
have nothing to do with these intriguing murders in Praed
Street which Hanslet had described. Unless, perhaps, the
Professor had seen some parallel between the methods of
the unknown criminal and those of this vague doctor
whose name began with an M. You never could predict
the direction from which the Professor would approach
a problem. All that you could be certain of was that it
would be different from the one you anticipated.</p>

<p>Arrived at the Museum, where he was a frequent visitor
on similar errands, he went carefully through the index
to the Law Reports. It was not until he came to the year
1906, that he met with anything which corresponded to
the data which the Professor had given him. Then he
found a reference to the trial of one Doctor Morlandson
for the murder of Lord Whatley. This must be the case
to which his employer had referred. He turned up the
records, and proceeded to make a careful abstract.</p>

<p>It appeared that Lord Whatley had been a man of
middle age, and of some considerable wealth. Dr.
Morlandson was his regular medical attendant, and in 1905
he had been compelled to warn his patient that he was
suffering from cancer, and that though an operation might
be successful, there was grave doubt that it would
permanently remove the source of the trouble. However,
Lord Whatley consented to undergo the operation. He
was removed to a nursing home, and a specialist was
called in. The patient went through the ordeal
satisfactorily, and after a while he returned home.</p>

<p>But, by the beginning of the following year, the
symptoms reasserted themselves, and Dr. Morlandson informed
his patient, who insisted that he should be told the truth,
that nothing more could be done, and that Lord Whatley
had nothing to look forward to but perhaps a year or two
of suffering. The relations between the two men were
rather those of close friendship than of doctor and patient,
and, subsequent to Dr. Morlandson’s pronouncement, they
saw a great deal of one another. Morlandson devoted as
much time as he could spare from his practice to sitting
with Lord Whatley, who was a childless widower and did
not encourage the visits of his friends and relations.</p>

<p>By the end of February it appeared that the disease
was progressing even more rapidly than Dr. Morlandson
had anticipated. He administered frequent injections of
morphia, and his patient was rarely conscious. Morlandson
continued to spend the greater part of his time with him,
and in Lord Whatley’s brief intervals of consciousness
his doctor, and the nurses who had been called in, were
the only people he spoke to.</p>

<p>He died early in March, in the presence of Dr.
Morlandson and one of the nurses, without regaining
consciousness. A cousin of Lord Whatley’s, who happened to
be his nearest relative, was in the house, and Morlandson
informed him that he would return home and bring the
necessary certificate with him later in the day.
Morlandson, who lived about a mile away, started to walk home.
When he had almost reached his own house, he heard a
sound of confused shouting, and saw a runaway horse
attached to a milk-cart, coming towards him. Without a
moment’s hesitation he rushed for the horse’s head, and
had almost succeeded in stopping him, when he slipped and
fell. One of the horse’s hoofs struck him on the head and
he was left unconscious on the road.</p>

<p>The spectators of the accident picked him up, and he
was carried into his own house. A colleague was
summoned, and declared that he was suffering from severe
concussion. This diagnosis proved correct, and
Morlandson lay in a state of semi-consciousness for nearly a week.
On his recovery, he found the house in possession of the
police.</p>

<p>Lord Whatley’s cousin, hearing of the accident to Dr.
Morlandson, and learning that he could not possibly
attend to his duties for some time to come, was at a loss
for the want of a death certificate. He therefore sent
for another doctor—not the man who was attending
Morlandson—and asked him to sign the certificate. This
the doctor would have done, had not one of the nurses,
whom Morlandson had reprimanded for some breach of
duty, made some vague insinuation that everything was
not as it should be. The doctor insisted upon examining
the body, and as a result of this examination he
communicated with the authorities. A post-mortem was held,
and Lord Whatley was proved to have died of an
overdose of morphia. The experts gave it as their opinion that
the deceased would not have died of the disease from
which he was suffering for another year at least. A
warrant was immediately issued for Dr. Morlandson’s arrest.</p>

<p>When Lord Whatley’s will came to be read, it was found
that he had left the sum of ten thousand pounds to
Morlandson, conditional upon his being his medical attendant
at the time of his death. This bequest was contained in
a codicil executed early in February.</p>

<p>Morlandson came up for trial at the Old Bailey in
July. The prosecution alleged that the codicil disclosed the
motive for the murder, and submitted that Morlandson,
fearing lest Lord Whatley should change his doctor
before he died, had made certain of securing the legacy by
poisoning him. They pointed out that, but for
Morlandson’s accident, he would have been able to certify cancer
as the cause of Lord Whatley’s death, and no suspicion
would have been aroused.</p>

<p>Dr. Morlandson’s counsel put in a very striking defence.
In effect, he pleaded guilty to the act of poisoning, but
affirmed that this was done at Lord Whatley’s express
command. He had already suffered considerably and
undergone an ineffectual operation, and refused to
contemplate the further agony to which he was condemned.
As soon as Morlandson had informed him that his case
was hopeless, he had begged him to put a end to his
sufferings at once, pointing out that such a course would cause
no grief or inconvenience to anyone. Morlandson had at
first refused, but at last, upon the solemn assurance of
Lord Whatley that he would find some means of
committing suicide unless his wishes were complied with, he
consented to inject morphia in increasing doses. This Lord
Whatley agreed to, and whenever he was conscious
Morlandson begged him to reconsider his determination.
Finally, knowing that the disease was incurable, and that
the man he cared for as his friend could only endure
months of suffering under his very eyes, he bade him
farewell and administered the fatal dose. The news of the
bequest came as a complete surprise to him.</p>

<p>Morlandson’s defence raised in an acute form a
controversy which had been going on for many years. Many
people held that he was completely justified in his action,
that his offence was purely technical, and that at the most
it merited a short term of imprisonment. But the jury, in
spite of a hint from the judge, found Morlandson guilty
of murder and refused to add a rider recommending him
to mercy. Sentence of death was duly pronounced, but the
Home Secretary, the Court of Criminal Appeal not being
then in existence, ordered a reprieve, and the sentence
was commuted to one of twenty years’ penal servitude.
Morlandson’s wife, to whom he was deeply attached, died
before a year of it had expired.</p>

<p>This was the substance of the notes which Harold
Merefield brought back to Dr. Priestley. The latter read
them through carefully, then gave them back to his
secretary. “Yes, I thought that I was not mistaken,” he
said. “The facts of the case come back to me very clearly
now. It made a considerable sensation at the time, owing
to the principle involved. Right or wrong, Morlandson
was acting in accordance with his lights. His evidence, I
remember, was given with an air of passionate conviction.
This Lord Whatley was his friend, and he had saved
him from suffering at the expense of twenty years of his
own life. I wonder whether he survived his sentence? It
would be most interesting to learn.”</p>

<p>The Professor relapsed into his favourite attitude of
thought, his eyes fixed upon the ceiling, his hands, with
the tips of the fingers touching, laid upon the table in
front of him. He remained like this for many minutes
before he spoke again.</p>

<p>“It would be so interesting that I feel impelled to take
steps to discover the facts,” he said. “After lunch I shall
visit the record department of Scotland Yard. While I
am away, you can complete the filing of those papers
I gave you yesterday, relating to the work which we
have just completed.”</p>

<p>Harold received these instructions without any great
enthusiasm. He was not greatly interested in the case of
this Dr. Morlandson, since it had occurred so many years
ago and could have no possible bearing upon any problem
of the present day. In his recollection of this forgotten
trial the Professor seemed to be neglecting entirely the
problems presented by the murders in Praed Street.
Perhaps he had decided that they were not worthy of his
notice. It was not every problem submitted to him which
appealed to him sufficiently to induce him to devote his
energies to its solution.</p>

<p>He spent the afternoon in the study, working half-heartedly
and awaiting the Professor’s return. But it was
not until nearly dinner-time that his employer came in,
and then he could see by his expression that the result of
his search had in some way disappointed him. Dinner was
passed in almost complete silence, and the two returned
once more to the study.</p>

<p>“I have discovered the subsequent history of Dr.
Morlandson,” announced the Professor abruptly, as soon as
he had finished his coffee. “I will recount to you the result
of my researches at Scotland Yard. You can make notes
of them, and file them with your précis of his trial.”</p>

<p>Harold produced pencil and paper, and the Professor
proceeded to give an account of how he had spent the
afternoon. After some delay the authorities at Scotland
Yard, who were always anxious to carry out any of Dr.
Priestley’s requests, even though they were ignorant of
the motive behind them, had found the record of
Morlandson’s career after his sentence. He had been sent
to Dartmoor, and had served his time there. He had been
released on licence in 1920, having undergone fourteen
years of his sentence. He had then remained for a short
time in London, arranging his affairs, but had not
communicated with anybody but his solicitor, to whom he
had expressed his intention of spending the rest of his
life in the most complete seclusion, and devoting himself to
chemical research, for which he had always had a bent
during the period in which he was in practice.</p>

<p>Before the catastrophe which had overtaken him,
Morlandson had been a tall, spare man, clean-shaven, and with
carefully brushed dark hair. Upon his release he had
developed a slight stoop, and although he was still
clean-shaven and smart in his appearance, his hair had gone
nearly white. He told his solicitor that he knew he had
only a few years longer to live, but that he hoped that
during that period his researches would confer some
benefit upon suffering humanity. He proposed to
commence them as soon as he could find a suitable spot for
the purpose, where he could live entirely alone.</p>

<p>A few weeks after his release, he found a half-ruined
cottage which answered to his requirements, situated in
a peculiarly desolate part of the Isle of Purbeck, in
Dorsetshire. He took up his residence here, repaired the
cottage, and added to it a laboratory, built of concrete.
Under the terms of his licence he was compelled to report
to the police, and they kept an eye upon his movements.
They might have saved themselves the trouble. Once he
was established in his cottage, his furthest excursion was
to Corfe Castle, the nearest town, to obtain supplies. He
lived entirely alone, and invariably walked across the
heath to and from his cottage. But, even while living this
hermit existence, he was always carefully dressed and
shaved. He made no attempt to conceal his identity, but
called himself Mr. Morlandson, having dropped the
prefix “Doctor.” He had, of course, been struck off the
register, and could not have practised as a doctor even
had he desired to do so.</p>

<p>The local superintendent to whom he reported
conceived a liking for him, and occasionally walked across
the heath to visit him. He invariably found him at work
in his laboratory, which was plentifully stocked with
chemicals of various kinds. He would never allow
smoking in the laboratory, for, as he pointed out to the
superintendent, the substances with which he was
experimenting were highly inflammable, and there was
consequently grave risk of fire unless proper precautions were
taken.</p>

<p>One night, rather more than a year after Morlandson’s
release, flames were seen from Corfe Castle across the
heath in the direction of his cottage. The superintendent
leapt on his bicycle, and dashed off to the scene. When
he arrived, he found the laboratory burning like a furnace,
and quite unapproachable. The flames had caught the
cottage, which was by then past saving, especially as the
only available water supply was from a well fitted with
a small bucket. The superintendent, at considerable risk
to himself, managed to enter the sitting-room of the
cottage, but could see no trace of Morlandson.</p>

<p>By morning the fire had burnt itself out. The cottage
had been completely destroyed, only two or three feet
of the outer walls remaining. The laboratory, being built
of concrete, had fared rather better. The greater part of
the walls remained, as did the steel door, which formed the
only entrance. The place had no windows, but had been
lighted from above through sky-lights in the roof. These
and the roof itself had completely disappeared. The iron
door was found to be locked upon the inside.</p>

<p>When it had been broken down, the interior of the
laboratory showed how fierce the fire had been. Every
trace of wood had been consumed, and solid metal fittings
had been melted into unrecognizable shapes. Among the
debris on the floor lay a charred human skeleton, upon
one of the fingers of which was a half-melted gold ring,
of which enough remained for the superintendent to
identify it as having been habitually worn by Morlandson.
The remains of the unfortunate man were huddled
up by the door, the key of which was in the lock. It was
clear that Morlandson had tried to make his way out
when the fire broke out, but had been overcome by the
fumes of the burning chemicals before he could achieve
his purpose. He had been in the habit of locking the door
in order to secure himself from interruption.</p>

<p>“You have made notes upon this?” asked the Professor.
“Good. File them away. I confess that there are many
things about this man Morlandson which I do not yet
understand. I was able to supplement your account of
the trial by an examination of the original records, which
I was allowed to make. These gave me considerable food
for thought. I believe that, through a pure accident, I
have stumbled upon one of the most curious occurrences
of modern times. I can, as yet, only conjecture, and so far
my conjectures are wholly unsupported by fact. Much
research will be necessary before these facts can be
established, and it is possible that I may not be spared for a
sufficient time to carry out this research.”</p>

<p>“Not be spared, sir!” exclaimed Harold, startled by
the grave tone of the Professor’s voice. “Why, you have
many years before you yet, I hope.”</p>

<p>“Death comes to us all, sooner, perhaps, than we
expect,” replied Dr. Priestley. “And I feel, this evening, that
death may be closer to me than I have supposed. Ah, do
I hear someone in the hall?”</p>

<p>With a nervous movement, entirely foreign to him,
Dr. Priestley rose from his chair and stood facing the
door. Harold, with a queer feeling of expectation, walked
towards it and opened it. In the hall stood Inspector
Hanslet, handing his coat and hat to Mary.</p>

<p>“Good evening, Mr. Merefield, I thought I’d look round
and see if the Professor had any information for me,” he
said. “May I see him?”</p>

<p>“Yes, come in by all means,” replied Harold, with a
sudden sense of relief. “But I shouldn’t stay too long, if
I were you. He’s rather tired and nervy to-night.”</p>

<p>Hanslet nodded, and Harold led the way into the
study. “It’s Inspector Hanslet, sir,” he said.</p>

<p>The Professor appeared to have entirely recovered his
usual equanimity. “Ah, good evening, Inspector,” he said
blandly. “I half expected that you would be round this
evening. I am very glad to see you.”</p>

<p>“I thought I would come round, on the chance that
you had some hint to give me,” replied Hanslet. “I can’t
make head or tail of the business I told you about last
night. The more I think about it, the more puzzling it
seems. It’s the utter lack of motive that makes it all so
inexplicable.”</p>

<p>“I believe, mind, I say only that I believe, that I have
discovered the motive,” said the Professor quietly.</p>

<p>“You have!” exclaimed Hanslet excitedly. Then,
seeing the slow movement of the Professor’s head, he smiled.
“I know you won’t tell me until you are certain,” he
continued. “But at least tell me this. Are there likely to
be any more of these mysterious deaths?”</p>

<p>“There will be one more, unless I am able to prevent
it,” replied the Professor.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch15">

<h2>Chapter XV. <br/> The Bone Counters</h2>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove, as Hanslet had said to Dr. Priestley, bore
the shock of the finding of the numbered counter
extremely well. He had refused to make any alteration in
usual habits, and it was with the greatest difficulty that
Whyland could persuade him to allow a constable to sleep
in the house at night.</p>

<p>“I can assure you that this mysterious warning does
not terrify me,” he had said. “I am an old man, and death
cannot be far off in any case. I am not sure that I should
not prefer a violent end to some lingering illness which
might leave me helpless for months before it killed me.
But, if you think that by keeping a close watch over me
you can gain some clue to the distributor of these counters,
by all means do so.”</p>

<p>He was in this frame of mind when Hanslet came to see
him on the Sunday afternoon. Whyland brought him
round and introduced him, and Mr. Ludgrove welcomed
him with his usual courtesy.</p>

<p>“I have heard of you, Inspector Hanslet, and I am
indeed proud to make your acquaintance. Sit down, and
make yourself comfortable.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Mr. Ludgrove,” Hanslet replied. “I
thought you wouldn’t mind my coming to have a chat
with you. Whyland here has told me all about these queer
happenings in this street of yours, and of the help which
you have been to him.”</p>

<p>“I am afraid that I have been of very little help,”
said Mr. Ludgrove with a smile. “Inspector Whyland has
been kind enough to appreciate beyond their value any
suggestions I have made.”</p>

<p>“Well, that’s as may be,” replied Hanslet. “Now, Mr.
Ludgrove, I am going to ask for further assistance on your
part. You know as much about these counters as I do.
They seem to have been sent, so far, to six men, all of
whom have died shortly after they received them.
Whyland tells me that he has utterly failed to establish any
connection between these men. Except for the fact that
Tovey and Copperdock were close friends, they all seem
to be comparative strangers to one another, and have
never been associated in any common enterprise. You see
what I mean, of course?”</p>

<p>“I do, indeed. In fact, Inspector Whyland and I
discussed the point, long ago. It might be possible to imagine
a motive for the murder of a group of men who were
inspired by a common motive or who belonged to some
common society. The difficulty is, assuming that the
agency which compassed their deaths was the same in
each case, to imagine a motive for the actions of that
agency.”</p>

<p>“Exactly!” exclaimed Hanslet warmly. “I see that you
appreciate my point as clearly as I do myself. But now
we have a fresh line of investigation. You yourself are
added to the list of those who have received the counter.
Can you explain why you should have been singled out?”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove shook his head. “As you may suppose,
the subject has occupied my thoughts ever since I found
the counter,” he replied. “I am an old man, as I have said
before, and for the last twenty years or more I have led
a retired life, retired, I mean, in the sense that I have
taken no part in the affairs of the world. I have had
enemies as well as friends; few men who have reached
my years could say otherwise. But most of the
contemporaries of my youth are dead, and in any case I do
not believe that any of the enemies I may have made
would be so vindictive as to seek my life.”</p>

<p>“Let us look at it another way, then,” said Hanslet.
“Can you imagine any way in which you, in common
with the six men who have already died, could have made
an unconscious enemy?”</p>

<p>“I cannot,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “Of those six men,
I knew only two personally, Mr. Copperdock fairly well,
and Mr. Colburn slightly. Both of these I have known
only since I came to live in Praed Street, five years ago.
Tovey, I had heard Copperdock speak of. The name of
Richard Pargent, I had seen mentioned in the newspapers.
The other two were complete strangers to me. I cannot
imagine how we could have committed any act in common
which would draw down upon us the vengeance of a single
assassin.”</p>

<p>“Then you do not believe that these deaths are the
work of a single assassin, Mr. Ludgrove?” enquired
Hanslet with interest.</p>

<p>“Not of a single man, acting upon any rational
motive,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “Even in the brain of a
homicidal maniac there is usually traceable some dim
guiding principle. He either conceives a hatred for a
certain class of person, or he kills indiscriminately, usually
selecting the people nearest to hand. In this case the
selection was anything, but indiscriminate. Mind, I am
assuming for the moment, as apparently you are yourself,
that the death of all six was the direct sequel of their
receipt of a numbered counter. If you adopt the theory
that a single man is responsible, you may as well believe
in the existence of the black sailor.”</p>

<p>“I am afraid that we are already committed to him,”
said Hanslet with a smile. “You see, we offered a reward
for him, and it would never do for the police to admit
that they had offered a reward for a ghost. Whyland, what
is your honest opinion of this black sailor?”</p>

<p>“Entirely between ourselves and this most comfortable
room, I have never believed in his existence for a
moment,” replied Whyland readily. “But what could I do?
That young rip, Wal Snyder, swore to having seen him,
and I couldn’t shake him.”</p>

<p>“Whether young Snyder saw him or not,” remarked
the herbalist, “your reward has made him a very real
person to the poorer classes of this district. One or other
of my customers sees him every night, usually during the
hour which immediately follows the closing of the public
houses. And, as a rule, they come here hot-foot to tell
me about it.”</p>

<p>“I’m sorry, Mr. Ludgrove,” laughed Whyland. “I
wouldn’t have done it if I could have helped it. By the
way, I suppose that you are perfectly satisfied that none
of these odd customers of yours know anything about
this business?”</p>

<p>“Perfectly,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “They are a strange
lot, I admit, professing a code of morals which in some
respects would shock the conscience of a savage, and
many of them are not above any petty dishonesty. But
murder, deliberate and planned murder, that is, is
outside their imagination. Besides, the way they know one
another’s most secret actions is almost uncanny. If one
of them knew anything about these deaths, they would
all know within a very short time, and the secret would
be a secret no longer. Of course, they all come to me with
long and complicated tales of how they could tell me the
name of the man who did it, if I will give them the money
in advance. But I am well accustomed to that, it is a
symptom which follows every crime committed in this
district.”</p>

<p>“You’re quite right, Mr. Ludgrove, I know something
of the ways of these people,” said Hanslet. “When they
talk like that, you may be sure that they know nothing.
It’s when they avoid the subject that you may learn
something. Well, I’m very glad to have met you. There’s
just one thing I should like to say. You have received
this counter, which was evidently slipped in here while all
of you were thinking of nothing but the death of Mr.
Copperdock. You, and those whose business it is to guard
you, are therefore fore-warned. As long as you do what
we ask you to, I do not believe that you are in any
danger.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled. “Mr. Copperdock was also
guarded and fore-warned,” he said quietly.</p>

<p>Whyland swore softly. “I believe Copperdock
committed suicide out of sheer funk,” he said. “Anyhow, I
can’t see any way in which he can possibly have been
murdered.”</p>

<p>“Well, I shall not commit suicide just yet, I promise
you that,” replied Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>It was not more than five minutes after the departure
of Hanslet and Whyland that the herbalist heard a soft
knock upon the door of the shop. He went to open it,
and found Ted and Ivy standing on the step, closely
scrutinized by the man in plain clothes who had been
deputed to look after Mr. Ludgrove’s safety.</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove glanced at Ivy, and welcomed Ted
warmly. “Come in,” he said hospitably. “I was going to
look in later and ask you if you would care to spend the
evening here. I am very glad you came over.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Mr. Ludgrove,” replied Ted awkwardly.
“This is Miss Tovey. You have heard poor Dad and me
mention her.”</p>

<p>“I have indeed. I am very glad to meet you, Miss
Tovey. I think that is the best chair. Won’t you sit down
and make yourself comfortable?”</p>

<p>The young people sat down in silence. It was evident
that they had come with a purpose, but now they had
arrived they did not quite know how to state it. Curiously
enough, it was Ivy who made the plunge.</p>

<p>“I’ve heard so much about you, Mr. Ludgrove, that
I felt that Ted and I simply must come and ask your
advice,” she began. “We both feel we must do something.
First of all my father is murdered, and now Ted’s. We
just can’t sit still and wait any longer. Mr. Ludgrove, can’t
something be done to punish the man?”</p>

<p>The herbalist looked at her gravely. “My dear young
lady, I sympathize with you entirely,” he said. “I, too,
have felt the desire to do something in the face of these
extraordinary happenings. But let me assure you that
the very best brains in the police are at work in the
matter. Inspector Hanslet, who was here just now, has
the matter in hand, and he has unravelled almost as
tangled skeins as this appears to be.”</p>

<p>“That was Inspector Hanslet, was it?” enquired Ted,
with interest. “We saw two men, one of whom we knew
was Inspector Whyland, come in to see you, and we
waited until they went away. I’ve heard of Inspector
Hanslet before, seen his name in the papers, often enough.
I’m glad he’s on the job, I shall feel that something’s being
done at last. The other chap always seemed to be hanging
round the poor old Dad, and doing nothing.”</p>

<p>“It is very difficult for the police to do anything
without evidence,” said Mr. Ludgrove gravely. “Now, since
you have come to ask my advice, I am going to take an
old man’s liberty and ask you both a question which you
may consider impertinent. Have either of you any
knowledge, concerning your dead parents, which you have not
imparted to the police? Or, perhaps, I should have put it
another way. Have either of you any suspicions, which
you have thought it better to keep to yourselves, as to
the motive which anyone might have had for committing
these murders?”</p>

<p>He looked at Ivy as he spoke, but she shook her head
emphatically. “I can think of nothing which I have not
already told Inspector Whyland,” she replied. “Daddy
was a dear, and I don’t believe he had an enemy in the
world,” she replied. “He was a little hot-tempered at
times, but everybody knew that he meant nothing by it.”
She paused for a moment, then continued with downcast
eyes. “I can imagine what may have passed through your
mind, Mr. Ludgrove, but Daddy wasn’t that sort of man.
I won’t say that he was above a mild flirtation, but I am
sure that no woman was the cause of his being murdered.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Miss Tovey,” replied the herbalist
gravely. “That is a franker statement than I had any
right to expect. And you, Ted?”</p>

<p>“No, I’ve told the police everything,” replied Ted
wearily. “I know they think that Dad committed suicide.
I believe they want people to think so, so that there won’t
be another undetected murder up against them. But I
know he didn’t. Dad wasn’t the sort of man to do a thing
like that. I know he got a bit tight sometimes, but why
shouldn’t he? It never did him or anybody else any harm.
But even when he was tight he never got morbid, like
some fellows do. Besides, he never used one of them
syringe things. I don’t suppose he’d ever seen one in his
life, and he wouldn’t know how to use it. No, Dad was
murdered, right enough, though I’m blest if I can see
how it was done.”</p>

<p>“Can’t you help us, Mr. Ludgrove?” broke in Ivy.
“Surely there must be some way of finding out who killed
Daddy and Ted’s father. It must have been some lunatic,
for no sane person could possibly have a grudge against
either of them.”</p>

<p>“The only way to find out seems to be to learn
something about these counters,” replied Mr. Ludgrove. “Your
father, I am told, received the first. Did you see it, Miss
Tovey?”</p>

<p>“No. I only know what mother told me,” replied Ivy.
“Daddy was a bit late coming back from Covent Garden
that morning, and I had finished my breakfast and gone
to work before he came in. Of course, he had no idea what
it meant, poor dear. He thought it was one of these
advertising dodges, and threw it into the fire, envelope and
all.”</p>

<p>“Well, that is a pity,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “The police
have seen all the others, and they say that they are all
exactly similar, and that the numbers seem to have been
written on them with the same pen and ink, just an
ordinary steel pen and red ink that one can buy at any
stationer’s. And, whenever they have been sent by post,
the envelopes have been of the same sort, the address
typed with the same machine, a Planet, and posted in this
district, London, W.2. This looks as though they had been
sent out by the same hand.”</p>

<p>“Typed on a Planet, were they?” remarked Ted.
“That’s the same machine as we’ve got.”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is a fairly popular make, I am told,” replied
Mr. Ludgrove. “But I have never used a typewriter in
my life, and know very little about them. No doubt Miss
Tovey can tell us if Planet machines are used
extensively?”</p>

<p>“I had never used one until Ted asked me to teach
him to use his, nearly a year ago now,” replied Ivy.
“There were none at the school I was at, and we haven’t
any at the office. But I believe that some firms have
several of them. They have not been sold in England for
very long.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Miss Tovey,” said Mr. Ludgrove. “Now
there is another curious thing which I should like to
mention. One day, when I was in your place, talking to your
father, I saw you sending out what I took to be accounts,
Ted. Was I right?”</p>

<p>“I expect so,” said Ted, readily. “I always look after
that side of the business.”</p>

<p>“Would you mind running across and getting me one
of the envelopes that you use?”</p>

<p>“Of course.” Ted left the room, and returned within a
couple of minutes, holding an envelope which he handed
to Mr. Ludgrove. “Those are what we always use,” he
said. “We’ve had them for nearly two years now.”</p>

<p>“Do you know where they came from?” asked Mr.
Ludgrove, examining the envelope with great interest.</p>

<p>“Dad bought a large quantity of them, ten thousand,
I believe, from a wholesale stationer somewhere in the
Harrow Road,” replied Ted. “I forget the name of the
people. They were going out of business, or something,
and were selling the stuff off cheap. Dad had an idea of
sending out a lot of circulars, and thought these would do
to send them in. But the scheme fell through, and I’ve
been using them for ordinary business purposes ever
since.”</p>

<p>“I see,” said Mr. Ludgrove thoughtfully. “Now, it is a
very extraordinary thing that the envelopes which have
been shown me as having contained these numbered
counters, are exactly the same in every respect as this that
you have just given me.”</p>

<p>This remark was received in horrified silence. It was
Ivy who broke it. “Mr. Ludgrove!” she exclaimed. “You
don’t mean——”</p>

<p>“I mean nothing,” replied Mr. Ludgrove swiftly. “I
am trying to make you both see one aspect of this matter
which has caused me much anxiety for some time. The
counters were marked with a pen and ink exactly similar
to those you have in your office, Ted. The envelopes in
which they were sent are exactly the same as the ones
you possess and have used for many years. The addresses
were typed with a Planet machine, which, according to
Miss Tovey, are not to be found in every office. Finally,
the letters were posted in this district, W.2. You cannot
fail to see the inference which must infallibly be drawn.”</p>

<p>“But, good heavens, the idea’s absurd!” broke in Ted.
“You mean that the counters were sent out from our
place!” He laughed mirthlessly, while Ivy stared at the
grave face of the old herbalist, only half comprehending.</p>

<p>“You, Ted, have seen at least one of these counters,”
continued Mr. Ludgrove, in a quiet and solemn voice.
“Do you remember ever seeing anything like it before?”</p>

<p>Ted stared at Mr. Ludgrove, and the incredulous
expression of his face turned slowly to one of mingled
amazement and horror. “Why, yes,” he stammered. “Dad
had a box of white bone counters just like the one I saw.
He used to ask his friends in to play some card game, in
which these counters were used. I haven’t seen them for
a couple of years or more.”</p>

<p>Again there was a silence, broken by something that
sounded like a sob from Ivy. Ted turned towards her with
a despairing gesture. “It isn’t true!” he exclaimed. “I
can’t explain it, but it isn’t true! Dad couldn’t have done
it. Why should he? There’s some terrible mystery
behind all this. I shall never believe that poor dad had
anything to do with it. Why was he killed himself, if he had?”</p>

<p>He turned appealingly to Mr. Ludgrove. “You don’t
believe it yourself, do you?” he said.</p>

<p>“Your father was my friend, and I should be the last
to accuse him,” he replied. “But, in fairness to you both,
I was bound to point out the direction in which any
enquiry as to the counters must lead. I do not profess to
understand it, but I must warn you that a man like
Inspector Hanslet cannot fail to perceive the points I
have mentioned.”</p>

<p>“But what am I to do if he questions me?” asked Ted
distractedly.</p>

<p>“Tell the truth,” replied Mr. Ludgrove solemnly. “Hide
nothing, for if it is discovered that you have concealed
anything, it will tell all the more heavily against your
father. There is only one true court of justice, the court
of our own hearts. A consciousness of innocence is the
only support against an unjust accusation. It would
perhaps have been better had your father realized this.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch16">

<h2>Chapter XVI. <br/> Corfe Castle</h2>

<p>For a couple of days after Inspector Hanslet’s last visit
to the house in Westbourne Terrace, Dr. Priestley’s
attitude had sorely puzzled Harold. He had hardly spoken a
word, and the greater part of his time had been spent in
sorting out the mass of documents which had accumulated
during the course of years in the massive presses which
lined the walls of his study. Harold said nothing,
knowing from past experience that it was useless to ask
questions. When the Professor was ready to issue his
instructions he would do so. Until then, untimely questions
would merely be rewarded with a rebuff.</p>

<p>It was therefore with intense eagerness that Harold
replied, one morning shortly after breakfast, the
Thursday following the death of Mr. Copperdock, to an abrupt
question by his employer: “My boy, what I am about to
say to you must remain a secret between ourselves, until
either my death occurs or I give you leave to speak. Is
that understood?”</p>

<p>“I undertake not to breathe a word to anybody,”
replied Harold.</p>

<p>“To nobody,” repeated the Professor emphatically.
“Not even to Hanslet, however urgent the need may seem.
I am going away for a time; how long that time may be
I cannot tell. I do not wish my whereabouts to be known,
as that would possibly place me in considerable danger.”</p>

<p>“You’re not surely going alone, sir!” exclaimed Harold.
“You’ll let me come with you, especially as you say there
is danger attached to your journey?”</p>

<p>But the Professor shook his head. “The danger may
exist in London equally,” he replied. “It is essential that
someone I can trust should remain here. Otherwise, my
boy, I should be more than pleased to take you with me.
Now, listen very carefully to these instructions. Do not
leave the house for long at a time, especially in the
evening. Open all my correspondence, and deal with it to the
best of your ability. Should there be among it any letter
of a startling character, put a message in the personal
column of <i>The Times</i>, ‘The asp has struck,’ and sign
it ‘Cleopatra.’ Do you follow this so far?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” replied Harold simply, but gazing at his
employer in bewilderment. There was something theatrical
about these extraordinary precautions utterly foreign to
the Professor’s usual methods of procedure.</p>

<p>“Very well,” continued the Professor. “If I find it
necessary to communicate with you it will be by letter.
The contents of the letter you may neglect. It may be
typewritten, or in a disguised hand. You will know the
letter is from me by the fact that it will be addressed in
the first place to Westbourne Grove. The word <i>Grove</i> will
be ruled through, and the correct word <i>Terrace</i> substituted
for it. The envelope will in fact, convey the message.
If the contents of the letter are to be read, which will
only be if any unexpected developments take place, the
envelope will be stamped with a three-halfpenny stamp.
If, on the other hand, it is stamped with a penny and a
halfpenny stamp, you will immediately proceed to the
Post Office from which it was sent, which you will
discover from the post-mark, where you will wait till I join
you. If the envelope is stamped with three separate
halfpenny stamps, you will go to Inspector Hanslet, explain
what I am now telling you, and persuade him to come
with you at once to the place indicated by the post-mark.
Is that clear?”</p>

<p>“Perfectly clear, sir,” replied Harold. “I’ll just make
a note of that code, if you don’t mind, sir.”</p>

<p>“No, make no notes!” commanded the Professor. “I
have purposely contrived the code so simply that you
can carry it in your head. You must realize that our
actions will very probably be watched, in fact, I should
not be surprised to learn that they have been under
observation for some considerable time. Now, the next
thing I want you to do is to type out a few copies of this
paragraph and distribute them to the news agencies.”</p>

<p>He held out a scrap of paper as he spoke, and Harold
took it from him. It ran as follows: “Dr. Priestley, whose
scientific writings have rendered his name familiar to the
British public, has received a cablegram begging him to
deliver a series of lectures at a number of the Australian
Universities. Dr. Priestley, who has just completed the
manuscript of his forthcoming book, <i>Some Aspects of
Modern Thought</i>, has accepted the invitation. Since he
is anxious to return to England before the end of the
year, he has left London hurriedly <i>via</i> Southampton and
Havre, in order to catch the Celestial liner <i>Oporto</i> at
Marseilles. He will travel by the <i>Oporto</i> to Sydney.”</p>

<p>In spite of several attempts upon Harold’s part, he
could elicit no further information from the Professor.
He typed out the paragraph, and took it round to the
agencies himself. When he returned, he found the
Professor upstairs busily engaged in piling a quantity of
clothes, which he was never likely to wear, into three or
four large trunks.</p>

<p>“You aren’t really going to Australia, are you, sir?”
he ventured.</p>

<p>“It would be quite useless for me to announce the fact
unless I were to make every appearance of so doing,”
replied the Professor tartly. “The boat train for Havre
leaves Waterloo at half-past nine, I understand. You will
arrange for two taxis to be here at a quarter to nine. I
always like to give myself plenty of time to catch the
train.”</p>

<p>The Professor was normally one of those people who
travel without any fuss. But on this occasion it seemed
that he could not accept anything unless he had seen it
done with his own eyes. He stood on the steps of the house
for at least five minutes, directing the taxi-drivers where
and how to distribute his trunks. When he and Harold
arrived at Waterloo, he insisted upon interviewing
innumerable officials, to each of whom he gave his
name, asking endless and apparently irrelevant questions.
Finally, having secured his seat, he walked up and down
the platform several times the whole length of the train,
instructing Harold as to the disposition of his household
in his absence. It was not until the train was on the point
of starting that he took his seat.</p>

<p>“Remember what I told you, my boy,” were his last
words as the train moved off.</p>

<p>The Professor had booked to Paris, where he arrived
before noon on Friday. He fussed about the Gare St.
Lazare for some little time, and finally put his trunks in
the cloak-room. He then went to one of the smaller hotels
in the Quartier de l’Europe, booked a room, for which he
paid in advance, and arranged for the collection of his
trunks from the station. He lunched at a big restaurant in
the boulevards, and spent the afternoon at the Louvre. In
the evening he returned to the Gare St. Lazare, ten
minutes before the Southampton boat train was due to
leave. He booked a ticket for Southampton, and with a
directness in singular contrast with the indecision he had
displayed on the outward journey, took his seat in the
train. He reached Southampton early on Saturday
morning, and remained in his cabin until the London train had
left the docks. Then, carrying a single suit-case, he
walked to the West station and took a ticket to Corfe
Castle.</p>

<p>Dr. Priestley, although he was known by name to a very
large circle of newspaper readers, who were periodically
entertained by one or other of his thrusts at some pet
nostrum of the moment, such as the craze for brown bread
or the discovery of vitamines, rarely or never appeared in
public. He had even escaped the doubtful honour of
having his photograph reproduced in the evening papers,
though this perhaps was a disadvantage, since it would
certainly have been unrecognizable. He was therefore in
no sense a public figure, in that he was most unlikely to
be distinguished from the ordinary crowd of travelling
humanity. He sat in the train without any attempt at
disguise, studying an ordnance map which he had laid
open upon his knees.</p>

<p>It was still early when he reached Corfe Castle. The
village, with its commanding ruin perched upon the
summit of a conical hill, was in full flood of its morning
activity. Dr. Priestley, standing at the station gate,
watched the passers-by for a moment with keen interest.
Not one of them paid him the compliment of more than a
fleeting and incurious glance.</p>

<p>He walked towards the heart of the village, and entered
the first inn he came to. Having ascertained that he could
have a single room for as long as he liked, he announced
his determination of spending a few days, and was finally
shown into a comfortable room with a view of the Castle.
Here he remained until lunch.</p>

<p>The Professor lunched with keen enjoyment. His
adventure was giving him an appetite. In spite of the
amount of travelling which he had done during the last
couple of days he felt thoroughly fit and well, much
better than he had during the winter in town. The menace
which had been revealed to him seemed far away to him
in this peaceful spot, it almost seemed to him as though
the whole of his discoveries had been merely some
impossible dream, the penalty of overwork, and that the
fresh country air, tinged with the faintly salt tang of
the sea, had swept it from his brain into the realms of the
unreal. Perhaps, after all, he was entirely wrong in his
deductions. Those mysterious murders in Praed Street
might have been the result of some entirely different
influence. He had merely conjecture to guide him:
somehow, now he had reached the place where alone the
corroborative facts could be gathered, it seemed as though his
actions and his fears were the effect of a sudden and
unaccountable impulse.</p>

<p>He wandered from the luncheon room past the little
saloon bar, and glanced in at the open door. The place
was empty; it was past two o’clock, and the local habitués
had returned to their labours. It was too early in the year
for visitors. The Professor walked into the bar, and took
a seat by the side of the counter.</p>

<p>The proprietor, who was serving a few belated customers
in the tap-room, came in at the sound of the Professor’s
entrance, and greeted him with professional
courtesy.</p>

<p>“Good afternoon, Mr. Deacon,” he said cheerfully.
(Deacon was the name which the Professor had inscribed
in the hotel register—it said much for the proprietor’s
skill that he had deciphered it correctly.) “I hope you
found your room to your liking, and enjoyed your lunch?”</p>

<p>“Yes, thank you,” replied the Professor. “I think I
shall be very comfortable here for a day or two. I looked
in here to ask you for a liqueur after my lunch. Perhaps
you will join me in one?”</p>

<p>“Liqueurs ain’t much in my line, thankee, sir,” replied
the landlord. “But I’ll take a drop o’ gin with you, since
you’re so kind. What’ll be yours, sir? I’ve got Benedictine,
Crème de Menthe——”</p>

<p>“I should prefer some old brandy, if you have it,”
interrupted the Professor.</p>

<p>“Ah, you know a thing or two, Mr. Deacon, I can see
that,” replied the landlord with a knowing wink. “I’ve got
a rare drop of brandy put away in the cellar. I never had
only six bottles of it, and there’s still four left. My
customers don’t hardly ever ask for it, it’s mostly beer or
whiskey with them. Unless it happens to be a gentleman
from London like yourself, sir.”</p>

<p>He disappeared, and returned in a few moments with a
long-necked bottle, from which he poured a glass of pale
amber liquid. “There, just try that, sir,” he exclaimed
proudly.</p>

<p>The Professor picked up the glass and sampled the
contents gravely. “Excellent, very excellent indeed!” he
commented approvingly. “I am quite sure that my doctor
would have prescribed this as part of the cure, had he
known of it.”</p>

<p>“Cure, sir?” enquired the landlord sympathetically. “I
hope the illness has not been serious?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, not at all,” replied the Professor. “One could
scarcely call it an illness. I have been rather run down,
that is all. Men of my age have to take care of themselves,
you know, and I have been devoting rather more time and
energy than was perhaps wise to my business in the City.
I found myself suffering from headaches and loss of
appetite, so my doctor ordered me a complete rest. He said
it was the only thing to set me up again.”</p>

<p>“Well, here’s your very good health, sir,” said the
landlord, tossing off his gin. “You couldn’t have come to a
better place than this for a rest. I was afraid, when you
comes in, that you’d find it too quiet at this time of year.
I says to myself, ‘Here’s a gentleman from London who’ll
be looking for a band and a promenade and what not?’
Why, sir, there isn’t even a sharry running at this season.”</p>

<p>“That fact adds another attraction to your most
comfortable house,” replied the Professor. “It was my doctor
who recommended me to come here. He motored through
on his way to Swanage last year. He recommends me to
take a fairly long walk after every meal. I understand that
you have some very beautiful heaths around here?”</p>

<p>“They may be beautiful, but they’re precious lonely,”
said the landlord. “They may suit you all right, sir, but
for my part I take the bus into Wareham or Swanage
when I wants to get out for a bit.”</p>

<p>“I shall not be sorry to enjoy the loneliness of the
countryside, after the bustle of London,” replied the
Professor. “But I suppose people do live on these heaths,
do they not?”</p>

<p>“Well, there’s a few clay pits, and now and then a
gravel quarry,” said the landlord. “But, take it all round,
you can walk a long way without meeting a living soul,
so long as you keep off the main road. It is like that all
over Purbeck, whichever way you go. Of course, there’s
a few cottages where the clay-workers live, but that is
about all, outside the villages, and there ain’t many of
them.”</p>

<p>“What an ideal spot on which to build a country
retreat!” exclaimed the Professor. “Not one of those villa
residences, which are growing up so plentifully all over
the country, but just a cottage, in the true sense of the
word, where one could enjoy without distraction the glories
of nature!”</p>

<p>The landlord looked at the Professor with a curious
expression. “You wasn’t thinking of doing anything like
that, was you, sir?” he enquired.</p>

<p>“Why, no, not at present, however much the idea might
appeal to me,” replied the Professor, artlessly. “I fear
that my duties in London would not allow me sufficient
leisure.”</p>

<p>“Queer thing, now, that you should say that about a
cottage, sir,” said the landlord confidentially. “It puts
me in mind of an odd thing that happened in these
parts, not so many years ago. All along of another
gentleman, about the same age as you might be, sir, coming
into this very bar and asking me if I knew of a lonely
cottage for sale.”</p>

<p>“Indeed?” replied the Professor casually. “Perhaps you
would refill my glass with that most excellent brandy.
And if you will do me the honour of taking another glass
of gin with me——”</p>

<p>“You’re very kind, sir,” said the landlord, filling up
the glasses. “I thought you’d take to that brandy. As soon
as I sees you taste it, I says to myself, ‘Here’s a
gentleman that knows a good drop of liquor when he sees it.’
’Tisn’t every gentleman that takes kindly to the drink
nowadays, sir. Why, there’s some of them what drops in
here for lunch as takes water with it! Can’t say I hold
with it myself. Well, here’s your very good health, sir!”</p>

<p>He consumed his glass of gin at a gulp, and stood with
his elbows on the counter, looking at the Professor. “Your
saying that about the cottage does put me in mind of that
other,” he said, reminiscently. “Mind you, sir, not that
he was like you at all. Of course I didn’t know who he was
when he came in, but I say to myself, ‘That fellow’s no
business man, I’ll warrant!’ And, as it turned out, I was
right! But you can always tell, can’t you, sir?”</p>

<p>“Usually,” agreed the Professor. “He was not a
business man then?”</p>

<p>“Not he!” exclaimed the landlord, contemptuously.
“He was one of them scientific chaps, like you reads
about in the papers. What good they does I don’t know!
Always seems to me as though they’d be better employed
doing something useful instead of talking a lot of
gibberish decent folks don’t understand. Well, this poor chap
suffered for his folly, anyhow.”</p>

<p>“Why, what happened to him?” enquired the Professor
without any great show of interest.</p>

<p>“Burnt to death!” replied the landlord, impressively.
“Burnt till there wasn’t nothing but a heap of charred
bones left, sir. Terrible thing it was, and him all alone
out on the heath there. Quiet enough chap he seemed too.
Why, I couldn’t believe my ears when the constable told
me about him afterwards. You wouldn’t have guessed
what the chap was really, not if you was to try for a
twelvemonth.”</p>

<p>“I daresay not,” remarked the Professor dryly. “I never
was good at guessing. What was he?”</p>

<p>“Ticket o’ leave man!” exclaimed the landlord, leaning
over the counter confidentially. “If you’ll believe me, that
man had just served fourteen years hard on Dartmoor for
murdering a Duke, when he walked into my bar as cool
as a cucumber. Oh, he was a deep one, was that Mr.
Morlandson! And not a soul bar the super knew a word
about it!”</p>

<p>“Burnt to death, was he!” remarked the Professor.
“Dear me, what a terrible end. How did it happen?”</p>

<p>“No one knows rightly,” replied the landlord. “He lived
all alone on the heath, over yonder towards Goathorn.
Built himself a concrete place, I can’t remember what the
super said he called it. Word something like lavatory?”</p>

<p>“Laboratory, perhaps?” suggested the Professor.</p>

<p>“Aye, that’s it, sir. You can see the ruins of it still, they
tell me. I haven’t been out that way since it happened.
Used to lock himself up in this place of his, and fiddle
about with all sorts of inflammable stuff. Bound to go up
it was, and sure enough it did. Just after closing time one
evening, Old George what lives way out towards Studland,
comes knocking at my door and says the heath’s on
fire. ‘Heath on fire!’ I say, ‘Why, it’s been raining for a
week. What are you talking about?’ ‘ ’Tis that for sure!’
says old George. ‘You can see the flames up along my
way.’ ‘Flames!’ I says, ‘It’s the stuff they gives you at
the Red Bull over yonder that makes you see flames, and
I don’t wonder at it!’ Well, he keeps on, and at last I goes
half a mile or so up the road with him. Sure enough, there
was a great pillar of flame coming up from the middle of
the heath.</p>

<p>“We hadn’t been there more than a minute when the
constable comes along. ‘What’s up yonder?’ I says. ‘Morlandson’s
place on fire,’ says he. ‘Super he’s gone off on his
bike. You chaps best come along and see what you can
do.’</p>

<p>“Well, sir, it weren’t no manner of good to take the
engine. She’s only one of them hand concerns, and last
time we’d had her out to practice, she pumped back’ards
like into the river instead of out of it. Joe Stiggs, him
what looks after her, said he found he’d put the valves
in the wrong way. Besides, it would have taken us best
part of an hour to push her out there, there ain’t no
regular road. And, what’s more, all the water out at
Morlandson’s place was a well what ran dry every summer.”</p>

<p>“Then there was nothing to be done?” commented the
Professor.</p>

<p>“Nothing whatsoever,” replied the landlord emphatically.
“Mind, we didn’t know Morlandson was inside. We
expected to find him running round outside chucking
water at it from a bucket. However, off we goes, and as
we gets close we catches the stink of it. Lord! I shan’t
forget it in a hurry. It was like the smell what comes from
the pits when they burns carcases when the
foot-and-mouth’s about.</p>

<p>“The super he meets us, and I reckon I hollered out
when I saw him by the light of the fire. He was black as a
sweep, and all the hair singed off his face. Told us he’d
been into the cottage, which was burning like a dry rick,
and that he couldn’t find Morlandson anywhere. ‘I reckon
he’s in there,’ he says, pointing to the lav——labor——what
you call it. ‘There’s a horrible smell of burnt flesh
about.’</p>

<p>“He was right there, it fair made me sick. But there
was nothing to be done. You couldn’t get within fifty
yards of the place. We waited till nigh on midnight, but
even when the flames went down the walls was red-hot
and we weren’t no further for’ard. Super, he stays on all
night, and in the morning he finds what’s left of
Morlandson, and that’s precious little.”</p>

<p>“Dear me, what a terrible thing!” exclaimed the
Professor.</p>

<p>“Aye, that it was,” agreed the landlord. “They brought
back what there was of the poor chap in a potato sack,
held an inquest on him, and buried him in the churchyard
yonder. And that is what happened to the last gent what
fancied a lonely life on the heath, sir.”</p>

<p>The landlord glanced up at the clock, the hands of
which pointed to five and twenty minutes to three. “Hallo,
I must close the bar, or I’ll be getting into trouble,” he
said, reluctantly removing his arms from the counter.</p>

<p>“A visit to the scene of the tragedy would provide me
with an object for a walk,” said the Professor. “Which
is my best way to it?”</p>

<p>“You can’t go wrong, provided you don’t mind a bit of
rough going,” replied the landlord. “If you go out of the
village towards Wareham, you’ll come upon a railway
track, what they runs the trucks of stones along. That
goes to Goathorn pier, a matter of six mile away or more.
Follow the line for nigh on three mile, and you’ll come to
a clay-pit. Then, about a quarter or half a mile away, on
your right, you’ll see what’s left of the place, standing up
among the gorse and heather. There is a track, but it’s
a long way round and plaguey hard to find if you don’t
know it. Now, if you’ll excuse me, sir, it’s past closing
time.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch17">

<h2>Chapter XVII. <br/> The Clay-pit</h2>

<p>Dr. Priestley walked out of the inn, and down through
the village towards the ruined castle, standing upon its
curiously artificial-looking mound. He had attained one of
the objects of his visit, corroboration of the story of the
death of Dr. Morlandson, and that without asking questions
which might have suggested that he had any interest
in the matter. Since the landlord had himself volunteered
the information, there could be no reason for his having
distorted the truth. Morlandson, by the evidence of those
best qualified to speak, was dead, and his charred bones
were resting in the quiet churchyard which the Professor
was at that very moment passing.</p>

<p>He felt a great desire to see the site of the tragedy,
but his natural caution prevented him from walking to
it immediately. He was most anxious to avoid any
suspicion that Mr. Deacon, the City merchant, was in any
way interested in the fate of the ex-convict. But, on the
other hand, there was no reason why he should not visit
the ruins of the castle, the scene of the murder of King
Edward the Martyr, three-quarters of a century before
the Conquest. It was the show place of the district, the
natural magnet for any casual visitor like himself.</p>

<p>The Professor climbed slowly up the steep slopes of
the natural earthwork, which stands like a fortress
guarding the only gap in the long range of the Purbeck hills,
and listened attentively while the guide, delighted at
finding a sympathetic audience so early in the year, recounted
the history of the stronghold and indicated its more
prominent features. Then, his inspection over, he sat down
on the grass on the north-eastern slope of the hill, and
drew his ordnance map from his pocket.</p>

<p>His horizon was bounded by the high land on the southern
side of the River Stour. At his feet was a rolling,
sandy plain, diversified here and there by clumps of trees,
but mostly covered with gorse and heather. This plain
stretched away into the distance, and beyond it an
occasional silvery gleam betrayed the winding channels of
Poole harbour. Here and there across the plain he could
see evidences of human occupation, the white surface of
a clay-pit or the roof of a tiny isolated cottage. But, apart
from these, the tract of country over which he looked
appeared utterly deserted, abandoned to a great silence
disturbed only by the note of some hovering bird.</p>

<p>His map told him that no road traversed this expanse.
Only a few winding paths, trodden by the feet of rare
wayfarers, led away from where he stood in the direction
of the thin whisps of smoke which indicated human
habitation. Here and there he could see traces of the railway
of which the landlord had spoken, which led from the
hidden quarries behind him to a pier built upon one of the
secluded arms of the harbour. It seemed to be but little
used. The Professor, enjoying the quiet of the fine
afternoon, sat for hour after hour, his eyes absorbing the subtle
beauty of this unharassed land. And, except for the
solitary figure of a labourer, tramping stolidly across the
waste towards some unknown destination, he saw no sign
of life in all the wide extent of country laid out before
his eyes. Yet, somewhere, lost among the lonely solitudes
of gorse and heather, lay the solution of the mystery which
he had set himself to solve.</p>

<p>Dr. Priestley smiled as the conviction that this was so
came back to him with redoubled force. Utterly contrary
to his usual methods of procedure, he had formed a theory
based entirely upon conjecture. So far, these facts by
which it must be tested seemed to point to the incorrectness
of this theory. Yet, were they facts? Was it not even
yet possible that some master brain had arranged these
seeming facts in order purposely to mislead an investigator
like himself? And, if so, what unknown dangers might he
not be incurring by the attempt to prove them false?</p>

<p>The Professor had never shirked danger throughout
the whole course of his career. And in this case, as he
reflected, he already stood in such imminent danger that
his present actions could hardly increase it. If his theory
were correct, a determined and unknown assassin held in
his hand already the weapon which was aimed against his
life. Why had he not struck, months ago, when the Professor
was in blissful ignorance that his life was threatened?
This was one of the aspects of a case which, in
spite of the perils which it held for himself, thrilled him
as no case had ever thrilled him before.</p>

<p>Sitting here, contemplating the peaceful afternoon, the
Professor reviewed his theory for the last time, testing
it with all the apparatus of probability. It <em>must</em> be correct,
there was no other theory which would fit in with all the
data before him. Yet, how could it be correct, in the face
of the formidable array of facts which seemed to
disprove it? This seeming contradiction it must be his task
to unravel, and that alone.</p>

<p>For he had realized at once that it was no good calling
in the aid of the police, even of Hanslet, whose
experience had taught him that the Professor’s most
extraordinary statements had a way of justifying themselves.
The police would merely confront him with their so-called
facts, and seek to prove to him that his theory was utterly
untenable. He could give them nothing tangible to go
upon, could give them no clue which would lead to the
capture of the undetected criminal he knew to be at large.
Even if they accepted his theory in its entirety, how could
they protect him from the dangers which encompassed
him? Sooner or later, in some unguarded moment, the
shadow would leap out upon him, and the Professor’s
theory would be proved upon his own body.</p>

<p>No, physical precautions were useless. It must be a
battle of wits between them—himself and this mysterious
killer. How far had a watch been kept upon his own
actions, the Professor wondered? He was almost certain
that he had not been followed to Corfe Castle, but he was
by no means so certain that his pretended departure from
England had imposed upon his adversary. <i>The Times</i> of
Friday had contained the paragraph mentioning his visit
to Australia. So far, so good. But it was almost with
surprise that he had failed to find the message in the
personal column, which should inform him that the letter
which he daily expected had arrived.</p>

<p>The Professor rose to his feet, and walked slowly back
to the inn. He had ordered dinner at seven o’clock, and it
was already past six. The landlord was standing at the
door, and the Professor nodded pleasantly to him as he
entered.</p>

<p>“What a beautiful afternoon!” he said. “I have been
admiring the view from the Castle. A very fine prospect
indeed, is it not?”</p>

<p>“Well, sir, some admires it and some don’t,” replied the
landlord. “I fancies something with a bit more life in it
myself. But I dessay it’s a change to you after London.”</p>

<p>“It is, indeed,” agreed the Professor. “Indeed, I am
so taken with the look of the heath, that I propose to
take a walk across it after dinner.”</p>

<p>“Well, don’t lose your way, sir. It’s a bit lonely out
there. You aren’t likely to meet anyone who’ll put you
right, either.”</p>

<p>“Oh, it is not really dark till ten o’clock,” replied the
Professor cheerfully. “I have my map, and the Castle
ruins must be visible from a long way off. You need have
no fears of my getting lost.”</p>

<p>“There’s no danger, sir,” the landlord hastened to agree.
“Only you might happen to wander a bit further afield
than you meant to. The bar closes at ten, but if you
happen to be later than that, you’ve only got to knock on
the door. I shan’t be abed afore eleven.”</p>

<p>The Professor’s dinner was served punctually at seven,
and by eight o’clock he was well on the road of which the
landlord had told him, and which his map showed him led
in the direction of the railway. A short distance beyond
the village he found a narrow lane, which, after a few
twists and turnings, brought him out upon the track. There
was a narrow path beside it, and along this he stepped out,
anxious to reach his destination while it was still broad
daylight.</p>

<p>The track followed a devious path across the heath,
which, viewed from near at hand, was more undulating
than at first appeared. The track had been built to avoid
the steeper gradients, but every now and then it ran upon
a low embankment or through a shallow cutting. On
either side the heath spread out, silent and mysterious,
sometimes bare and sandy, with twisted pine trees
standing above it at intervals, sometimes covered with low,
dense thickets, in which the general silence seemed to be
accentuated. When the line rose slightly to cross one of the
lesser eminences, the Professor caught a fleeting glimpse
of still water, the wandering arm of some unfrequented
lagoon among the islands of the harbour. Behind him the
sun hung low over the long range of the Purbeck hills,
which changed from green and gold to blue and purple
as the sun sank ever lower. Against them, the sharp
outlines of the ruined Castle stood out clear cut like a beacon.</p>

<p>As the Professor strode on through the silence, devoid
of any vestige of human habitation, he noticed how
admirably adapted was this barren heath to purposes of
concealment. Spread over its surface were a series of
shallow depressions, shaped like a saucer, and sometimes
holding an abandoned gravel pit, now half filled with
stagnant water after the winter rains. A man might lie
concealed in one of these, secure from observation, for as
long as he could keep himself supplied with food. There
would be no risk of discovery, those whose business led
them to cross the heath kept strictly to the narrow paths,
barely a foot wide, which meandered at wide intervals
through the close growth of heather. A living man, so long
as he avoided observation from these paths, might lie
hidden for as long as he chose. And if a living man, why
not a dead body? How easy to drag the damning evidence
of crime into one of those dark thickets, to sink it into
the silent depths of one of those black, unruffled pools!</p>

<p>The Professor shuddered, and increased his pace. This
lonely heath was no place in which to indulge in morbid
thoughts. His life might be in danger, but somehow he
felt that it was not here that the blow would fall. If his
theory were correct, if he had gauged aright the
psychology of his adversary, it would not be thus that he
would meet his death, here where there was none to
witness the blow. Despite the almost threatening aspect of
the country, deepening in tone every instant as the sun
sank lower behind the distant hills, there was no
vestige of any real danger. The shadows that lurked amid
the gorse and heather were but the shadows of his own
fears.</p>

<p>So the Professor reasoned with himself. It would have
been folly for him, wishing as he did to avoid any
suspicion of his interest in Dr. Morlandson, to approach the
scene of his death during the day. The very track by the
side of which he was walking contained a potential risk
of discovery. It must be used sometimes, the rails showed
signs that wagons had passed over them not so very long
ago. They led only to a pier, or rather jetty, upon which
the contents of the wagons were unloaded into a waiting
barge. The pier was utterly unfrequented except by these
barges. The track, in fact, was a dead end as far as any
casual wayfarer was concerned. There could be no
rational excuse for following it.</p>

<p>He topped a slight rise, and saw in the distance the
white surface of the clay-pit which was to be his guide.
From where he stood, he could see a considerable distance
on either side of him. There was no sign of life upon the
heath, except that far away, perhaps a couple of miles, the
outlines of a cottage stood out against the grey
background.</p>

<p>The Professor reached the clay-pit, and searched the
undulating surface of the heath for some sign of the
remains of Dr. Morlandson’s laboratory. For some moments
he failed to find it, and then, at last, he made out the
jagged tooth of a broken wall thrust upwards from
behind a clump of gorse bushes. This, no doubt, must be his
goal. There was no path leading to it from the track, but
the Professor, using his stick to feel the way, stepped out
boldly across the heather, which yielded like a cushion to
his footsteps.</p>

<p>The distance from the track to the ruin must have
been six or seven hundred yards. It took the Professor
some little time to cover it, since he was obliged to make
several detours in order to avoid clumps of gorse. But
he reached it at last, and stood on the edge of what had
once been a clearing, surveying the scene that lay before
him.</p>

<p>The cottage itself had completely vanished. All that
remained of it was a mound thickly overgrown with weeds
and coarse grass, from which protruded here and there
fragments of charred beams and rafters. The encroaching
heath had hidden any signs of any garden there might
once have been, and it was impossible for the Professor
to form any idea of what the place had looked like while
it was still standing. But the laboratory, having been built
of concrete, had defied the utter obliteration to which the
rest of the premises had succumbed. Its broken walls,
rough and jagged, stood up in a gaunt rectangle, roofless,
their foundations hidden deep in the all-effacing
vegetation, but still marking without fear of error the site
upon which the building had stood.</p>

<p>The Professor pushed through the weeds and undergrowth
until he reached the gap in the wall where the
door had been. The door was still there, rusty and twisted,
lying almost hidden at the base of the wall, where it had
been thrown by Dr. Morlandson’s would-be rescuers. It
was a plain sheet of iron, fitted with hinges and a lock.
The Professor glanced at it, then passed through the
door-way into the space enclosed between the walls.
Something, perhaps a grass-snake, rustled among the grasses as
he entered.</p>

<p>The laboratory had been a fairly spacious room, about
thirty feet by fifteen. Of its interior fittings nothing
whatever remained. As the Professor advanced into the interior
of the space his boots struck metal at every other step.
He stooped and probed with his stick, and brought to
light a twisted and shapeless tangle of iron, which might
once have been the frame of a skylight. He examined
it for a moment, and then cast it aside, with a nod
of comprehension. The walls themselves still showed upon
their interior surface the signs of having been subjected
to an enormous heat. He poked about inside the laboratory
for a short while longer, then came out and sat down
upon the mound which had once been a cottage.</p>

<p>There could be no doubt that the fire which had
destroyed the laboratory had been far fiercer than that
which had burnt down the cottage. The charred beams
of the latter still existed, while nothing whatever
remained of the wooden fittings of the former. And yet, in
case of a concrete-built laboratory, one would have
expected a fire merely to have burnt out the interior
without doing much damage to the structure. The place must
certainly have contained a large quantity of substances
whose combustion produced great heat, such as thermite.
And Dr. Priestley knew enough of the methods of research
chemists, who as a rule deal in very small quantities, to
wonder why Dr. Morlandson required such large quantities,
and why, even supposing that his isolated situation
made it necessary for him to obtain his supplies in bulk, he
should store them in the laboratory itself. The suspicion
that Dr. Morlandson’s activities had not been solely
concerned with researches into the properties of medicinal
drugs seemed to the Professor to be thoroughly well
grounded.</p>

<p>To the Professor’s mind, there was even something
suspicious about the origin of the fire itself. Dr.
Morlandson had been aware of the danger of such an
outbreak; he had warned the police superintendent against
smoking in the laboratory. This being so, was it likely
that he would lock himself into what had proved to be a
regular death-trap, and leave himself with no means of
escape? The doubt raised by these queries set the
Professor’s mind to work upon an entirely fresh train of
thought. Had Dr. Morlandson’s death been as accidental
as it had appeared? Or was it possible that he too had
had an enemy, who had somehow contrived the whole
affair? And, if so, what became of the theory which had
brought the Professor to the Isle of Purbeck?</p>

<p>The Professor awoke with a start from his meditations,
suddenly conscious that the light was failing rapidly.
It was already past sunset, the ruined Castle which was
to be his landmark was now indistinguishable against the
universal grey of its background. A faint, silvery mist
was rising above the heath, wreathing every object within
sight with a curious opalescent halo. The Professor realized
that he had already spent long enough contemplating
this deserted heap of ashes. Their secret, did they hold
one, was not to be wrested from them by further study
that night.</p>

<p>He turned his back upon the gaunt skeleton of the
laboratory, and walked round to the further side of the
mound. Here the stumps of a rotten post or two showed
where a fence had probably surrounded the front garden,
now long since overgrown. Beyond the posts a white
thread caught the Professor’s eye, and he made his way
up to it. It was a narrow track, apparently disused for
years, and had no doubt once been the path by which the
cottage was approached.</p>

<p>In one direction it led towards the railway line by
which the Professor had approached the place, and
rejoined the line lower down than the point at which he
had left it. He started to walk down the track, with a
muttered exclamation of satisfaction. By following it he
might add a yard or two to his journey, but it
would save him a slow and tiresome trudge through the
heather in the gathering darkness. Of his ability to find
his way back to the inn he had no doubt. He had only
to follow the railway line backwards until the lights of
the village came in sight, and then strike across country
till he reached them, even if he missed the lane by which
he had come.</p>

<p>The Professor had not gone very far before he stopped
dead, and bent down to examine the narrow white strip
beneath his feet. He felt in his pocket, and struck a
match, which he held close to the surface of the path. It
was a still, windless evening, and the flame of the match
burnt clear and unflickering, illuminating a narrow circle
of fine, white sand. Across the centre of this patch,
following the path upon which the Professor stood, ran the
sharp and unmistakable imprint of a bicycle tyre.</p>

<p>Somehow the discovery made the Professor’s pulses
beat quicker than before. This apparently deserted track
was in use, then, despite its overgrown appearance. No
doubt it formed a short cut between two spots upon the
heath, such as a pit and a clay-worker’s cottage. This was
the obvious explanation, but to the Professor’s mind it
seemed unsatisfactory. He had studied the map very
carefully that afternoon, and knew roughly the location of
every human habitation marked upon it. And this
particular track seemed to run in the wrong direction to
connect up with any of these. Was it possible that
somebody beside himself was interested in the ruined cottage
which he had just left?</p>

<p>He threw the match away, and strode forward briskly
in the direction of the railway line, which he calculated
must now be less than a quarter of a mile ahead. He
had an uncanny feeling that the rider of the bicycle might
have been concealed close at hand while he was investigating
the ruins, that he himself might have been the object
of close observation all the time he had believed himself
to be alone in the vast emptiness of the heath. It was an
uncomfortable and a disturbing thought, and the Professor
pushed on rapidly, grasping his stick tightly. Of course
it was absurd, he was not the least likely to be molested.
But he could not keep his mind from drawing ugly pictures
of the dark thickets, of those deep, black pools,
so admirably adapted as a hiding place for a murdered
body——</p>

<p>And then, all of a sudden, with an abruptness which
fell upon his ears like a blow, the Professor heard a bell
ring sharply behind him. He spun round in his tracks,
raising his stick instinctively, as though in self-defence.
Coming along the path behind him was a tall figure on a
bicycle, indistinguishable but for its outline in the
swiftly-falling night. The slight mist magnified it to inhuman
proportions.</p>

<p>Dr. Priestley stepped back into the heather, and waited
for the figure to approach him. As it came nearer he
began to distinguish details one by one. It was a man,
dressed apparently in trousers and jersey, with a seaman’s
cap upon his head. The Professor felt a sudden feeling of
relief. No doubt this was a man from one of the stone
barges which came up to Goathorn Pier to load stone or
clay. He would no doubt join the railway, and follow the
track beside it down to the pier. He could see the man’s
features by now, or such of them as were not hidden by
the mass of black beard, which grew up in whiskers on
either side of his face until it was lost beneath his cap.
And then, with a sudden recollection of a certain vivid
description which Hanslet had given him, the Professor
realized that the man had an angry-looking scar extending
the whole length of his right cheek. Even as he realized
the significance of the man’s appearance, he had
dismounted from his bicycle, and stood confronting the
Professor.</p>

<p>“Good evening, Dr. Priestley,” he said pleasantly, but
in a curiously harsh and strained voice. And, at the words,
the Professor knew that this was indeed the Black Sailor.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch18">

<h2>Chapter XVIII. <br/> The Avenger</h2>

<p>The Black Sailor stood in the middle of the path,
leaning on his bicycle and looking at Dr. Priestley with a
faint smile of amusement in his eyes. The Professor, for
his part, stood his ground and waited for what might
come next. He understood quite well that any attempt
to escape would be pure folly. If it came to a chase across
the heather, the sailor would overtake him in half a dozen
strides. And as for shouting for help—well, the nearest
inhabited house was nearly two miles away.</p>

<p>Besides, what was there to shout about, after all? The
sailor appeared to be unarmed, and his expression was
rather one of amusement than of menace. The absurdity
of the situation began to appeal to the Professor. He had
been accosted by the man whom the police would have
dearly loved to lay their hands upon, and he was utterly
powerless to take any steps towards his capture.</p>

<p>The Black Sailor broke the silence. “You seem
interested in the fate of the unhappy man who ended his days
in this lonely spot?” he said, with something that sounded
like a short laugh.</p>

<p>“The fate of Dr. Morlandson has a particular interest
for me,” replied the Professor significantly.</p>

<p>“Yes, it would have, naturally,” said the sailor
conversationally. “It has puzzled me why you have been so
long in realizing it. I didn’t expect it of the others, but
you, surely, should have guessed the motive long ago. It
would interest me to know what brought the connection
to your mind?”</p>

<p>The Professor hesitated. Yet, after all, he was in this
man’s power. So far as he could see, his only chance of
escape lay in gaining time, until by some miracle a
belated labourer should come past within hailing distance.
It was the most unlikely thing in the world to happen,
but there was just a chance. Consequently, since the
sailor seemed disposed to talk, it was best to humour him.</p>

<p>“I guessed it first when I heard the name Copperdock
again,” he replied. “I could not remember at first
where I had heard it before, but finally, the whole scene
came back to me.”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is an unusual name,” agreed the sailor, “but,
if you will excuse my saying so, Dr. Priestley, you appear
to be not entirely at your ease. Perhaps it will reassure
you if I remind you that no single one of the victims of
Dr. Morlandson’s vengeance has come to any harm until
he has received the counter with his number on it.
Although, as you seem to believe, you are included among
them, you are perfectly safe until that token is delivered.”</p>

<p>“I have no alternative but to believe it,” replied Dr.
Priestley, steadily, “for I was the foreman of the jury
which condemned him.”</p>

<p>“It is for that reason that you have been reserved till
the last,” said the sailor solemnly. “It was Dr. Morlandson’s
wish that it should be so, and that, before you died,
you should understand the reason for your punishment.
Do you remember Dr. Morlandson, as you last knew
him?”</p>

<p>“I remember him in the dock,” replied the Professor.
“A tall, slim, clean-shaven man, with an intellectual face,
and a pleasant soft voice.”</p>

<p>“You remember his appearance,” exclaimed the sailor
impatiently, “you never knew the man’s soul, as I did.
Dr. Morlandson loved two things in this world with a
passion which filled his whole being, his wife and his
profession. His sympathy with suffering was unlimited,
and his nature recoiled from the spectacle of any pain
which could be prevented. And you, twelve good men and
true, took it upon yourselves to condemn him to death
because he had the courage to put one of God’s creatures
out of his agony. At one blow you took from him all that
he loved and lived for, his profession, and his wife who
died under the shock of her husband’s conviction. Can
you wonder that during those long years of torment in
prison, his thoughts turned from sympathy to vengeance?
Yet, even in his vengeance he was merciful and killed
swiftly.”</p>

<p>Dr. Priestley nodded. “Yes, I guessed that was the
motive,” he said in a matter of fact tone. “I took the
trouble to look up the names of the jurymen, as soon as
I remembered that it was while I was serving on that
jury that I had met a man bearing the name of Copperdock.
The others were Tovey, Colburn, Pargent, Martin,
Goodwin, Thomas, Bailey, Underhill, Abbott and
Hewlett.”</p>

<p>“Quite right, Thomas, Bailey, Underhill, Abbott and
Hewlett were already dead when Dr. Morlandson was
released. Their punishment has passed into other hands.
Of the remaining seven, six have paid the penalty which
they wished to inflict upon Dr. Morlandson. You only
are left, Dr. Priestley.”</p>

<p>“I had realized that my life was threatened,” replied
the Professor calmly. “As you have probably guessed, it
was for the purpose of verifying the fact of Dr.
Morlandson’s death that I came here.”</p>

<p>“Dr. Morlandson is dead, but he left his vengeance
behind him,” said the sailor sombrely. “You killed him as
surely as though the law had taken its course upon your
cruel verdict. He came here, a broken man, to die in
solitude like a stricken animal. I met him, not a hundred
yards from this very spot, a few days after he had come
to live in the cottage. I was desperate that evening. I had
murder in my soul, no matter why. I would have killed
him then and there for what he might have had about
him, but I was afraid. There was something about him
that prevented me from touching him, I did not know
what it was. He took me to the cottage with him, and
talked to me all night. And at last I found out that he
was in the grip of a hate greater than mine.</p>

<p>“I saw him every day after that. I was the only person
he spoke to, except that fool of a police superintendent
who used to come out to see him. He’d have been glad
enough to lay his hands on me, if he had known that I
was hiding within a few yards of him. Hour after hour
we talked, Dr. Morlandson and I, while he fed me and
sheltered me. He told me his whole story, and at last,
when he knew he could trust me, he made me an offer.
If I would become the heir to his vengeance, I should
also be heir to a very large sum of money he had safely
concealed.</p>

<p>“He explained his plans to me in detail. During his
years in prison he had thought over every little thing,
and his scheme was complete. But one thing he had not
allowed for, and that was the fact that prison life had
broken him up. He, who had gone to prison a strong man,
came out ruined in health and body. His mind had eaten
him up, as he put it. The awful hours of solitude, when his
only means of diverting his thoughts from his wrecked
life was to perfect his plans for vengeance, had sapped
his youth and his strength. He came out an old man,
utterly incapable of the task before him.</p>

<p>“I had told him my story, such as it was, and he saw
in me the one man who could take his place. I was an
educated man once, Dr. Priestley, forced by
circumstances to abandon my former life and become what you
see me now. In those months I was in Morlandson’s
company he taught me more than I had ever learnt before. He
told me the names of the men who had formed the jury,
and showed me how I was to trace each of them. He had
thought out dozens of ways of killing them undetected,
and he explained to me how each should be employed
according to circumstances. In that laboratory which he
built he spent long hours working at poisons which should
be swift and effective, in preparing weapons which could
not fail in the clumsiest hands. He taught me anatomy,
where the vital organs of the body lay, how to strike so
as to produce instant death. Within a few months I was
fitted to undertake the task which he had delegated to
me.”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor paused, and looked intently at the
Professor, as though to assure himself that he was taking
in all that was being said to him. “It was Dr.
Morlandson’s wish that you should fully understand the reasons
for your punishment before you died,” he continued.
“You, at least, we had no difficulty in tracing. Your name
was frequently in the papers, you were the only one of
the twelve who had attained any fame whatever, except
perhaps that conceited ass Pargent. It was only fitting
that you, as foreman, should be reserved until the last.
Morlandson hoped that you would guess the reason for
the deaths of your fellow members, and so realize the
fate which was hanging over your head.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I think I understand it all pretty thoroughly
now,” replied the Professor. “There are, however, one or
two points upon which I am not quite clear. I am told
that Mr. Ludgrove, the herbalist, has received a counter
bearing the number VII. I presume that this is not due
to you, since Mr. Ludgrove was not a member of the
jury, nor, to the best of my recollection, was he concerned
with Dr. Morlandson’s trial.”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor scowled, and looked fiercely at the
Professor. “Ludgrove is an interfering busybody,” he
growled. “I do not propose to explain my methods to you,
naturally, but this much I will tell you, Ludgrove has on
more than one occasion prevented me from carrying out
my designs, I have no other quarrel with him, and he is
in no danger so long as he minds his own business. The
counter was sent to him as a hint to keep out of the
business altogether. And, by the way, Dr. Priestley, when you
get back to London, you may give him this message from
me. Unless he keeps clear, the counter, which was only a
warning, will be followed by something worse.”</p>

<p>He laughed harshly as he saw a flicker of astonishment
pass across the Professor’s face. “Oh yes,” he
continued. “You will no doubt go back to London and recount
your experiences to your friend Hanslet and the rest of
the police. Why not? I have no doubt they will be very
pleased to learn the motive for these mysterious murders
which have so sorely puzzled them. They may dimly
realize that an apparent murder may sometimes be a just
execution. But the knowledge won’t help them much, and
it won’t help you, Dr. Priestley. In fact, it was Dr.
Morlandson’s wish that the reasons for the deaths of his
victims should be fully known. His example may cause
jurymen to consider their verdicts more carefully in
future. And as for me, what harm can any of you do?
Why, from the first there has been a reward upon my
head, a reward you will never earn, Dr. Priestley.”</p>

<p>He paused, and then continued more seriously. “You
are a sensible man, and must see how utterly useless any
attempt to put the police on my trail must be. It will take
you an hour at least to reach the police station at Corfe
Castle, and heaven knows how much longer to persuade
the police to search for me. Don’t for an instant think
this meeting is accidental. It is not. I have for some time
been seeking for an opportunity of meeting you. It was
Dr. Morlandson’s expressed wish that I should see you
and explain matters. Now that I have done so, the Black
Sailor will disappear, only to appear once more, when
your sentence is to be executed.”</p>

<p>“And that sentence is——?” enquired Dr. Priestley
firmly.</p>

<p>“That you should live in the constant expectation of
a violent death,” replied the Black Sailor gravely. “The
time may come soon or late, but you cannot escape the
doom which hangs over you. You may take what precautions
you please, you may condemn yourself to a life of
constant supervision within the walls of a fortified house.
If you do, you will know something of the hell which
Dr. Morlandson endured as the result of your verdict.
But at last the moment will come, and you will be stricken
with death when you believe yourself to be safest.
Copperdock was warned, he was under the special care of the
police, he was alone in his own house with the door locked
behind him. Yet death found him, as it will find you
when the time comes, Dr. Priestley.”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor put his foot on the pedal of his
bicycle. “You will excuse me if I break off this interesting
conversation,” he said. “I have many things to attend to
to-night, and it is getting late. But before I go I will give
you this. It will serve to remind you that your meeting
with me was not a trick of your imagination. It may also
be useful as evidence of your veracity when you tell the
story to the police.”</p>

<p>He drew something from his pocket, and threw it
contemptuously at the Professor’s feet. Then, before the
latter could reply, he had jumped on his bicycle and was
pedaling rapidly in the direction from which he had come.</p>

<p>It was quite dark by now, and the Professor watched
his retreating form until it was lost in the night. Then
he bent down and picked up the object which he had
thrown upon the ground, and which glimmered faintly
upon the dark surface of the heather on which it had
fallen. He knew what it was, without the trouble of
striking a match. It was typical of him that he handled
it by the edges, and wrapped it carefully in his
handkerchief before he put it in his pocket. Then he started
once more on his homeward journey, his mind full of
this interview with the man who called himself the Black
Sailor.</p>

<p>His theory had been vindicated. During the night which
had followed Inspector Hanslet’s first visit to him, he
had racked his brains in the endeavour to recall the
circumstances under which he had first heard the name of
Copperdock. And then, at last, just before dawn, the scene
had come back to him. The gloomy court at the Old
Bailey, the voices of counsel, the set tense face of the
prisoner in the dock. And finally, the scene when the
jurymen, under his direction, had discussed the verdict which
was to decide the man’s fate. Yes, he remembered the
name of the little man who had seemed to share his own
merciful views. Copperdock, that was it. The names of the
others he did not remember, but they had seemed to be
inspired with a stolid common-sense virtue. One of them
had implied that if doctors thought they could get away
with this sort of thing, there was no knowing what they
would be up to. They were a lot of butchers as it was,
always cutting people up to find out what was the matter
with them.</p>

<p>Yes, he remembered the scene well enough. It had been
impossible to argue with his colleagues on the jury. The
majority were against him and the man Copperdock;
they could only acquiesce in their opinion. The twelve
had filed back to the places in court, he could see now the
look of awful anxiety in the eyes of the prisoner. And
then, in reply to the solemn question of the judge, he had
spoken the words, “Guilty, my Lord.”</p>

<p>Morlandson had been reprieved, and, according to the
notes made by Harold, must by now be at liberty. Was
it possible that he had returned to the world with
vengeance in his heart? The Professor had obtained
permission to examine the official records of the trial, and had
thus learnt the names of the remaining members of the
jury. Five of them corresponded with the names which
Hanslet had mentioned as the victims of the recent
mysterious murders. There could be no further doubt.</p>

<p>But Morlandson had died, burnt to death in his laboratory
within a year or so of his release. How was this fact
to be fitted in with this theory? The Black Sailor had
enlightened him upon this point. Dr. Morlandson had
handed on his vengeance to this mysterious successor,
whose true identity he had no means of guessing. It was
true that in one direction his doubts had been resolved,
but only to be replaced by a series of questions, equally
imperative. Who was this man, who called himself the
Black Sailor? The Professor had examined his appearance
intently while the light lasted, and could see none of the
obvious traces of disguise. He could swear that his most
striking beard and whiskers had been genuine, and he
had worn his clothes naturally, as though accustomed to
them. Again, how had he known that Dr. Priestley was in
the neighbourhood? The Professor was certain that he
had not been followed during his journey from London.
It was impossible that this man should live openly, with
the reward for the Black Sailor circulating all over the
country. Was it possible that he lived concealed
somewhere in this desolate tract of country? And if so, how
did he contrive to carry out his murders within the very
heart of London?</p>

<p>These problems would wait. A more urgent one seemed
to the Professor to require solution. What, he asked
himself, had the Black Sailor’s object been in seeking this
meeting? The Professor was quite prepared to believe
that the reason he had given accounted for part of the
truth. He could well imagine Morlandson, his brain turned
by his fancied grievance, wishing the effects of his
vengeance to become known. This was to be expected, it was
merely an example of the curious vanity usually displayed
by maniacs. But was there any other purpose in the
meeting, which he had not yet understood? And, in any case,
what course was he to take?</p>

<p>As the Black Sailor had suggested, to set the local police
on the scent would be sheer waste of time. No serious
attempt to scour the heath could possibly be made before
daylight next morning, by which the object of the search
would be far away. They might find the tracks of his
bicycle, but if he desired to elude pursuit all he would
need would be to carry it for some distance over the
heather. The Professor credited the man who had baffled
the London police by the ingenuity of his murders with
sufficient acumen to leave no tracks by which he could be
followed. No, the police could not help him, if he were to
escape the fate that threatened him, it must be by his own
efforts.</p>

<p>And so far his adversary had completely outwitted
him. In spite of his own elaborate precautions, his
investigations into the death of Dr. Morlandson were known
and had been treated as the most natural thing in the
world. For his own part, he had learnt very little that he
had not known before. Certainly his theory as to the
motives for the murders in Praed Street had been
confirmed. This was a small satisfaction to place against the
Professor’s chagrin. He had also learnt that the Black
Sailor, in spite of official scepticism, was an actual person.
But of his identity, or the means by which the crimes
had been committed, he had learnt nothing. From the
police point of view he had failed utterly, since he had
failed to secure any information which could possibly lead
to an arrest.</p>

<p>It was nearly eleven o’clock when the Professor saw
the lights of the village in the distance, and, leaving the
railway line, found the lane which led homewards. The
sound of his footsteps re-echoed among the silent houses,
the whole place breathed an atmosphere of perfect peace
and tranquillity. His recent adventure seemed to the
Professor as an impossible dream, a trick of his mind, so long
concentrated upon the subject. So strong was the illusion
of unreality that the Professor was impelled to feel the
hard outline of the counter hidden in the folds of his
handkerchief. There had been something theatrical about
the whole adventure; the time, the place, the man’s
appearance, his voice, so curiously harsh and rasping, his
very words, so utterly at variance with his character of a
rough sailor. With something of a shock the Professor
remembered that Copperdock had claimed to have seen
him at a moment when it was proved that there was no
one there. Was it dimly possible that there was something
supernatural about the affair? The Professor brushed the
suggestion aside as absurd.</p>

<p>The inn was closed by the time he reached it, but,
remembering the landlord’s instructions, he knocked upon
the door, and after a short interval the key turned in
the lock and the door opened. The landlord’s voice
welcomed him. “Bit later than you expected, sir, aren’t you?”
he said. “Did you lose your way or anything like that?”</p>

<p>“No, the—er—beauty of the night tempted me to stay
out of doors,” replied the Professor.</p>

<p>“Well, sir, come ten o’clock, and seeing as you didn’t
come home, I put a drop of that old brandy aside for you.
I hope I don’t presume too much, sir.”</p>

<p>“You did not indeed, I shall be very glad of it,” replied
the Professor thankfully.</p>

<p>The landlord disappeared for a moment, and returned
with a glass on a tray, which he handed to his guest. “I
thought you might be glad of it after your walk, sir,”
he said. “Did you find the ruins of Dr. Morlandson’s
cottage?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I did,” replied the Professor quietly. “A most
isolated spot. I noticed that there was a path running past
it. Where does that lead to?”</p>

<p>“It doesn’t lead nowheres in particular, sir. When the
cottage was first occupied, before Morlandson’s time, it
led out to the Studland road. That was the only way to
the place before that railway line was built. The path’s
still there, is it? I should have thought it would have
been growed over by now.”</p>

<p>“No, you can still trace it,” said the Professor. “And,
curiously enough, there were the marks of a bicycle wheel
running along it.”</p>

<p>“A bicycle!” exclaimed the landlord. “Well, to be sure!
When there’s a barge lying at Goathorn the fellows on
board sometimes brings bicycles and rides in here by the
side of the railway line, but I don’t know what could
have taken any of them past the cottage there. Perhaps
one of them wanted to get to Studland, though there’s a
shorter way there from Goathorn through Newton. I
should have said nobody used that path, not once a year.”</p>

<p>“No, I do not imagine that this man Morlandson saw
many visitors,” said the Professor reflectively. “I suppose
people occasionally went to see him, though?”</p>

<p>“I don’t believe, bar the men who built the laboratory,
that a soul went near the place except the super I was
telling you of, sir,” replied the landlord. “Leastways, I
never heard of any. Morlandson used to come in and
fetch everything he wanted. If there was anything heavy,
he’d bring a barrow with him. No, sir, if you’ll believe me,
that man never saw a soul when he was at home, except
the super. Didn’t care about meeting people, I suppose,
with a past like his.”</p>

<p>“Well, he certainly chose a lonely place for his retreat,”
agreed the Professor. “I do not suppose that any strangers
were likely to disturb him?”</p>

<p>“Lor’ bless you, no, sir. ’Tisn’t many strangers as
finds their way on to the heath, unless it’s a gentleman
like yourself, out for a walk, and then they keeps to the
paths. It’s not overgood going over the heather.”</p>

<p>“So I discovered,” replied the Professor. “But, on the
whole, I have had a most interesting evening.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch19">

<h2>Chapter XIX. <br/> A Discovery</h2>

<p>It was quite evident to the Professor that since his
presence upon the Isle of Purbeck was known to his mysterious
acquaintance of the previous evening, there was no further
need for secrecy as to his movements. As soon as he had
breakfasted on Sunday, he put a trunk call through to
London, and very shortly had Harold on the end of the
wire.</p>

<p>“Yes, it is Dr. Priestley speaking,” he said. “The asp
has struck, Cleopatra. Does that satisfy you? Yes, yes, I
know, but circumstances have made it necessary for me
to change my plans. Now listen. Put another short
paragraph in the papers, to the effect that domestic reasons
have made it impossible for Dr. Priestley to carry out his
projected lecture tour in Australia. He was recalled by
telegram from Paris, where he stopped on his way to join
the <i>Oporto</i> at Marseilles, and will shortly return to
London. Having done that, get in touch with Inspector
Hanslet, and bring him to Corfe Castle by the train leaving
Waterloo at 2.30 this afternoon. I will explain the reasons
for asking him to come when I see him. I will meet the
train at Corfe Castle station. Is that clear?”</p>

<p>Apparently it was, for after a further word or two the
Professor laid the instrument down. He spent the day
within the portals of the inn, to all appearances studying
the contents of the Sunday papers, but actually trying
to solve some of the problems suggested by his incredible
meeting with the Black Sailor.</p>

<p>The train came in to time, and out of it stepped
Inspector Hanslet and Harold. They glanced at the
Professor enquiringly as they greeted him, but asked no
questions until they were outside the station. And even then it
was the Professor who spoke first.</p>

<p>“I am Mr. Deacon here, to the landlord of the inn, at
least,” he said. “I will take you there and you can leave
your suit-cases. Register in any names you like, but do
not divulge your connection with the police, Inspector.
It would attract undesirable attention.”</p>

<p>Hanslet nodded, and the Professor introduced the two
to the landlord as the friends he had been expecting. They
left their suit-cases, and then followed the Professor out
into the village street.</p>

<p>“This is a most interesting country,” he said
conversationally. “I should like to show you the Purbeck Hills
from the distance. We have, I think, time for a walk
before dinner.”</p>

<p>Hanslet nodded. “I should be glad of a stroll after
sitting in the train,” he replied. “Lead on, Mr. Deacon.
You know the way.”</p>

<p>The Professor took the lane which led towards the
railway line. It was not until they were well beyond the
outskirts of the village that he spoke.</p>

<p>“I must apologize for my recent actions,” he said at
last to Hanslet. “I think you will understand them when I
have explained my reasons to you. I was anxious to come
here without anybody suspecting my presence. I had
formed a theory as to the motive of the murders in Praed
Street. Harold, my boy, tell Inspector Hanslet, as
concisely as you can, the facts about the arrest and trial of
Dr. Morlandson.”</p>

<p>Harold obeyed, and as he finished Hanslet nodded. “I
remember the case vaguely,” he said. “But I don’t
see——”</p>

<p>The Professor interrupted him. “I happened to be the
foreman of the jury. When you mentioned the name of
Copperdock the other night, I fancied that it was familiar
to me. Eventually I remembered that a man of that name
had been one of the jurymen. More out of curiosity than
anything else, I took steps to discover the names of the
remainder of the panel. They were Tovey, Colburn,
Pargent, Martin, Goodwin, and five others, whom I am
informed have since died.”</p>

<p>“Good heavens!” exclaimed Hanslet. “Then you mean
that this Morlandson, who was released from gaol after
serving his sentence, is the murderer! Why on earth didn’t
you tell me so before, Dr. Priestley? It will be simple
enough to trace him. Our people at the Yard will know all
about him.”</p>

<p>“They do,” replied the Professor drily. “They have a
completely authenticated record of his death, which
occurred five years ago. In fact, I am now taking you to the
place where it happened.”</p>

<p>“But he can’t have died five years ago if he murdered
Copperdock only last week!” exclaimed Hanslet in
bewilderment. “There’s some mistake. There must have
been two Morlandsons and you’ve got hold of the wrong
man.”</p>

<p>The Professor shrugged his shoulders. “Ask our
landlord, when we return to the inn,” he replied. “He is a
most communicative man, and will, no doubt, be
delighted to tell you the story, as he told it to me. I had the
same doubts as you have expressed, and it was these
doubts which brought me down here. I enquired for
Morlandson’s history as tactfully as I could, and I examined
the scene of his death, as I shall ask you to.”</p>

<p>“I am quite prepared to accept your statement,
Professor,” said Hanslet. “How did it happen?”</p>

<p>The Professor recounted the facts of Morlandson’s life
on the Isle of Purbeck, and the circumstances under which
he met his death. “All these things can of course be
verified,” he said, as he came to the end of his story.
“It was while I was engaged in verifying them yesterday
evening that I met with an adventure which can only be
described as amazing. You will remember the man
described as the Black Sailor, first seen by Wal Snyder at
the time of the murder of Tovey the greengrocer, and
subsequently by Copperdock?”</p>

<p>“The man Whyland was persuaded to issue a reward
for?” replied Hanslet with a smile. “Yes, I remember.
We seem pretty generally agreed that he was a myth.”</p>

<p>For a moment the Professor made no reply. They had
by this time reached the spot where the track from
Morlandson’s cottage crossed the railway line. The Professor
stopped, and turned to Hanslet impressively. “I met him
last night, about three hundred yards from this spot,”
he said simply.</p>

<p>Hanslet stared at him in amazement. “You met him!”
he exclaimed. “You mean you saw someone who looked
like him, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“No, I met him, and had a most interesting conversation
with him,” replied the Professor. “He was riding a
bicycle, and since there has been no rain since last night,
you will see the tracks in a few minutes. Further, he gave
me this.” The Professor produced his handkerchief,
unrolled it, and handed Hanslet the numbered counter.</p>

<p>“Good Lord, this beats anything I ever heard of!”
exclaimed Hanslet. “What did the man say to you?”</p>

<p>The Professor gave a careful and detailed account of
his adventures on the previous evening, to which Hanslet
and Harold listened in silence. He finished by explaining
that he had thought it useless to set the local police on the
Black Sailor’s track, and Hanslet agreed.</p>

<p>“The fellow would have been miles away before you
had got them to move,” he said. “Of course, I shall have
to circulate his description again, in case anybody else
saw him. But he can’t have gone about openly, with a
reward on his head like that. Somebody would have been
bound to have spotted him. It’s the most amazing story I
ever heard. You don’t suppose he was pulling your leg,
do you?”</p>

<p>“How did he know my name, and the names of the
jurymen who served with me?” replied the Professor.</p>

<p>“Well, this case is full of most extraordinary
contradictions. We’d better have a look at these bicycle tracks
you speak of, it’s just possible we may be able to find out
the direction in which he went off. Where did he mount his
bicycle and ride away, Professor?”</p>

<p>“About a quarter of a mile along this path. Lead the
way along, Inspector, and I will stop you when we reach
the spot.”</p>

<p>They proceeded in single file, Inspector Hanslet
leading. After about five minutes the Professor spoke. “It
was just where you are standing, Inspector.”</p>

<p>The party halted, and Hanslet bent down to examine
the path. The sand was in admirable condition to receive
and retain an impression; firm enough to resist the force
of the wind, yet not too hard to take even the lightest
imprints. Hanslet, kneeling in the heather by the side of
the path, looked at it closely.</p>

<p>“You’ve mistaken the spot, Professor,” he said at
last. “There are no tracks here. It doesn’t look as if
anybody had passed along here for a long time.”</p>

<p>The Professor frowned. “I do not usually mistake a
spot which I wish to remember,” he replied. “However,
it was nearly dark when I left it, and I may have made an
error of a few yards. As you can see, this track leads
straight to those ruined walls, which are the remains of
Morlandson’s laboratory. It was in that direction that the
man made off. If you follow the path, you are sure to
find the tracks further along.”</p>

<p>They resumed their way, Hanslet examining every foot
of the path as they proceeded. It was not until they
reached the ruined posts which had marked the limits
of the front garden that Hanslet turned and looked
anxiously at the Professor.</p>

<p>“You are quite sure that this was the path he
followed?” he asked. “I can’t see any tracks along it at all,
either of your feet or of the bicycle.”</p>

<p>“Perfectly certain,” replied the Professor stiffly. “I am
not likely to mistake it, especially as it would appear to
be the only path in the vicinity.”</p>

<p>Hanslet nodded, and made his way through the tangled
vegetation towards the ruins of the cottage. He walked
carefully round the mound, then proceeded to the broken
walls of the laboratory. He gazed at these for a minute
or two, then turned towards his companions, who had
remained on the path.</p>

<p>“I wish you would come here a minute, will you, Mr.
Merefield?” he called.</p>

<p>Harold obeyed his summons, and Hanslet led him round
an angle of the walls, out of sight of the Professor. “Has
he been overdoing it a bit lately?” he asked in a low tone.
“Overworking himself, or anything like that, I mean? I
thought he looked pretty well done up when I first saw
him the other evening.”</p>

<p>“Well, he’s hardly been outside the house for the last
six months,” replied Harold. “He’s been busy with a
new book, and I think it took it out of him a good deal.
Why?”</p>

<p>“You heard that extraordinary yarn he spun us just
now, about the Black Sailor and his bicycle. If the tracks
showed anywhere, it would be on that path. Now here, all
round this place, you can see the Professor’s footmarks.
He was here all right last night, as he says. But it’s odd
we can’t find traces of the other fellow. You don’t think
he can have dreamt it, do you?”</p>

<p>“It would be most unlike him,” replied Harold. “Why
should he imagine such a thing, anyhow?”</p>

<p>“Well, you see, if this jury business is correct, he is the
only survivor. You remember his telling us the other day
in town that there would be one more murder? He meant
that his own life was threatened, and I expect it’s been
preying on his mind. It’s the only way I can account for
this business.”</p>

<p>Harold shook his head. “It is true that he hasn’t been
quite himself lately,” he replied. “But I don’t think he’s
got to the stage of seeing things. Anyhow, how do you
account for the counter he gave you just now?”</p>

<p>“How do you account for anything in this blessed
case?” retorted Hanslet. “I believe the devil’s at the
bottom of it, if you ask me. I wish you would follow up
that path in the opposite direction for a bit, while I poke
about here. If you find the marks of a bicycle wheel,
don’t touch ’em, but come back and tell me.”</p>

<p>Harold followed the path for half a mile or so in the
direction of the Studland road, and returned shaking his
head. Hanslet had by this time finished his inspection of
the ruins. He turned to the Professor, who had joined
him. “Well, there’s nothing very definite to be seen here,”
he said, with his usual cheerful smile. “What do you
suggest we do next, Professor?”</p>

<p>“Return to the inn for dinner,” replied Dr. Priestley.
“To-morrow, if you agree, I propose to return to London
by an early train.”</p>

<p>“I think that will certainly be the best course,” agreed
Hanslet. “I will just run round to the local police station
after dinner, and have a chat with whoever’s in charge.
We must certainly follow up this valuable clue of yours.”</p>

<p>They returned to the inn, and after dinner Hanslet went
round to the police station. The superintendent who had
been in charge at the time of Morlandson’s death had
since been promoted and had left the district, but Hanslet
had no difficulty in verifying the story as told by the
landlord. He had disclosed his identity, and explained that he
had come down in connection with a case in which he was
interested, without however mentioning the Praed Street
murders. In the course of conversation with the sergeant
in charge he elicited the information that no strangers had
recently been heard of in the district, and certainly
nobody in any way resembling the Black Sailor.</p>

<p>“There’s a few foreigners and the like comes in to
Poole, sir,” the sergeant had explained. “But they never
comes over this way. The barges what goes up to Goathorn
are all local craft, and there’s never a stranger among
them. If any stranger was wandering about the heath,
we’d get to hear of it, sharp enough. Why, it’s an event
in the lives of these clay-workers if they see a strange
face.”</p>

<p>“Well, if you should hear of a strange man with a
bicycle having been seen, you might let me know,” said
Hanslet. “Good night, sergeant, I won’t trouble you any
further.”</p>

<p>Hanslet left the police station, more convinced than
ever that the Professor was suffering from some
temporary aberration. He had known such cases before, where
overwork had caused the queerest effects. It was quite
understandable. The Professor had certainly discovered
the motive for the murders; it could not be a
coincidence that all the men who had died had served on this
particular jury and had been the victims of this
mysterious murderer. But, having discovered this, and realizing
that he was the only survivor, the Professor must have
received a shock which had unduly stimulated his
imagination. This was all that Hanslet could make of it.
Meanwhile he determined to keep a very close watch over the
Professor, for, if his theory was correct, his life was
undoubtedly threatened, Black Sailor or no Black Sailor.</p>

<p>The party returned to London on the Monday morning,
and Hanslet immediately went to see Whyland, whom he
had left in charge during his absence. At the police
station he was told that he had gone to see Mr. Ludgrove,
and thither Hanslet followed him.</p>

<p>He found Whyland and Ludgrove seated in the latter’s
sanctum, and the herbalist greeted him warmly on his
entrance. “Come in, Inspector,” he said. “Mr. Whyland
and I are talking about the death of Mr. Copperdock.
As you see, I am still alive, in spite of my numbered
counter.”</p>

<p>“So I see,” replied Hanslet. “You’ve seen or heard of
nothing suspicious, I suppose, Whyland?”</p>

<p>“Not a thing,” replied Whyland. “Mr. Ludgrove and
I set a little trap, but nothing came of it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, what was that?” enquired Hanslet. “Did you
wander about Praed Street with counters stuck on your
backs, or what?”</p>

<p>“Better than that,” said Mr. Ludgrove with a smile.
“Of course, you realize that five out of six of these deaths
have taken place in Praed Street, don’t you? Well,
another thing is that they have taken place during the
week-end. It was a fair inference that if my life was to be
attempted, it would be during the week-end, and in Praed
Street. Do you agree?”</p>

<p>“Well, it sounds reasonable, anyhow,” replied Hanslet.
“What about it?”</p>

<p>“I felt as though a breath of country air would do me
good,” continued the herbalist. “As Inspector Whyland
may have told you, I usually try to spend a week-end out
of London at least once every three weeks. For one thing
it does me good, and for another my business obliges me
to collect herbs from time to time. And I happen to have
heard of some particularly fine colchicums growing near
Dorchester.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Ludgrove told me this, and I thought it wouldn’t
do him any harm to go and look for these collycums, or
whatever he calls them,” broke in Whyland. “Besides, his
suggestion gave me an idea. So we smuggled him off to
Paddington, where two of my plain clothes men saw him
into a train on Saturday morning. I reckoned he’d be safe
enough out of London. Then I stayed here, being careful
to keep a light burning in the shop, so as people would
think Mr. Ludgrove was in residence. Then we met Mr.
Ludgrove’s train at Paddington yesterday, evening, and
brought him back. But, as I say, nothing happened. I only
had one visitor all the time, and that was young
Copperdock, on Sunday morning. I explained to him that Mr.
Ludgrove was upstairs, and he said he would look in again
later. But he never came, at least while I was here.”</p>

<p>“Well, it wasn’t a bad notion, certainly,” said Hanslet.
“I don’t think I should go about alone too much, if I
were you, Mr. Ludgrove.”</p>

<p>The herbalist smiled. “I hardly get the chance,” he
replied. “I have a habit of taking a brisk walk in the
neighbourhood every evening. During this last week I
have never gone more than a few steps before being
accosted by a charming and talkative individual who insists
upon accompanying me. I am not complaining, I have
found his conversation most interesting.”</p>

<p>“And he yours, Mr. Ludgrove,” laughed Whyland. “I’m
sorry, but what can we do? I don’t want to alarm you,
but you know there is the chance that an attack might
be made upon you. And that attack would give us the
clue we want.”</p>

<p>“I see. I am to be used as a stalking-horse,” said Mr.
Ludgrove. “Well, I have no objection. I am only too glad
to be of service in unravelling this terrible mystery.”</p>

<p>Hanslet, who had been silent for a moment or two,
suddenly turned towards Whyland. “You say that nobody
came near you while you were alone here but young
Copperdock. What did he want, I wonder? Have you seen
him since you came back from your herbalizing
expedition, Mr. Ludgrove?”</p>

<p>A grave expression spread over the herbalist’s face. “I
have,” he replied. “It was for this reason that I asked
Inspector Whyland to come here and see me. I was about
to tell him the story when you came in, and I realized that
it would be better if you heard it together. Ted
Copperdock came here yesterday evening, about an hour after
my return.”</p>

<p>“Oh, he did, did he!” exclaimed Hanslet. “What did
he want?”</p>

<p>“He told me he had come round in the morning to
ask me if I would go through his father’s belongings with
him. Finding me busy, as he supposed, he went back
home, and started to go through them by himself. He
spent the whole afternoon sorting out Mr. Copperdock’s
papers, and it was not until late that he began to look
over his clothes. In the pocket of one of his coats he
discovered something which, as he himself said, terrified
him. He came to me at once, and begged me to come back
with him. He was so insistent that I broke the promise
which I had made to Inspector Whyland, not to go alone
into any house in Praed Street, and went upstairs with
him into his father’s bedroom. There he showed me an
overcoat hanging in a cupboard, and in the pocket of
it—this!”</p>

<p>The herbalist rose, walked to the bench at the far end
of the room, and pointed to an object wrapped loosely
in paper. Hanslet and Whyland followed him, and the
former unwrapped the paper carefully. As the object
appeared, they both uttered a startled exclamation. It was
the blade of a knife, and with it a long wooden handle,
with a hole running the whole of its length, and fitted with
a set-screw.</p>

<p>Whyland bent over it with a look of triumph. “I knew
it, all along!” he exclaimed. “Look at this blade! It is
exactly similar to the ones found in the bodies of Tovey
and Pargent. You see the dodge, don’t you? This blade
just fits the hole in the handle. It’s meant to be pushed
through and gripped by the set-screw. But, if you tighten
the screw as far as it will go first, then put the blade in,
it is held lightly, just by its very end. Now, if you stab
a man with the blade fixed like that, what happens? The
blade goes in all right, and there it stays, while you walk
away with the handle. It’s beautifully simple, and you
leave no finger-marks behind you.”</p>

<p>But Hanslet stared at the knife in silence, his brain
a whirl of conflicting theories. If the Professor was
correct in his assumption, Copperdock was a victim of the
unknown assassin. How did this knife, which, as Whyland
said, was exactly similar to those with which Tovey
and Pargent had been killed, come into his possession? On
the other hand, if Copperdock had been the murderer,
what became of the Professor’s theory? Why should one
of the jurymen wish to murder his colleagues? The
problem became more complicated with every fresh discovery.</p>

<p>“This blessed case would drive an archangel to drink,”
he observed disgustedly, as he wrapped up the knife
again and put it in his pocket. “Well, we’d better go across
and see what young Copperdock has to say about this,
eh, Whyland?”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch20">

<h2>Chapter XX. <br/> Mr. Ludgrove’s Invitation</h2>

<p>April gave place to May, and May to June, with no
further development in the mystery which surrounded the
Praed Street murders. The discovery of the knife in the
pocket of Mr. Copperdock’s overcoat, combined with the
fact that although Dr. Priestley and Mr. Ludgrove had
each received a numbered counter, they had not so far
been menaced by any particular danger, had convinced
the police that the secret had died with Mr. Copperdock.
A very careful examination of the handle showed that
it bore his finger-marks, and his son, although he could
not account for its presence where he had found it, was
emphatic that it could not have been placed there since
the night of his death.</p>

<p>The Professor made no reference whatever to the case,
either to Harold or to Hanslet. The latter during his
infrequent visits to the house in Westbourne Terrace,
made no reference to the case. He was becoming more
and more convinced that the Professor’s interview with
the Black Sailor had been a pure hallucination; that the
Professor, having imagined the sequel to his theory of the
jurymen, had somehow been under the illusion that the
events of his imagination had actually taken place. In
his own mind, however, he was by no means satisfied
with the official view of the matter, of which Whyland
was the principal exponent. It left so much to be
explained, chiefly Copperdock’s motive, to say nothing of
his methods. To begin with, how had he contrived to
murder Mr. Tovey, when at the moment of the latter’s
death he was sitting comfortably before his own fire?
And, if the answer to this was that he had accomplices,
who and where were they?</p>

<p>However, his superiors appeared to be satisfied, and,
towards the beginning of June Hanslet went off upon his
long postponed leave. The Professor’s time was fully
occupied in correcting the proofs of <i>Some Aspects of
Modern Thought</i>, which were now coming in from the
printer, whose reader, appalled by some of the Professor’s
strictures upon his contemporaries, had scattered here
and there across the margin the ominous words “Query,
libellous?” To each of these the Professor added the
note: “Nonsense!” in letters half an inch long at least.
It was perhaps fortunate for the conscientious reader
that he was beyond the reach of the Professor’s tongue.</p>

<p>The rigid police protection which had at first been
imposed upon both the Professor and Mr. Ludgrove had
been gradually relaxed until now it had dwindled to
nothing more serious than a casual glance at their houses
by the constable on beat when he happened to pass them.
The professor himself appeared to have forgotten the
warning given to him by the Black Sailor, and to have
acquiesced in the official view that, since the perpetrator
had committed suicide, nothing further would be heard
of the murders.</p>

<p>It was while matters were in this state that Dr. Priestley
received one Saturday morning a letter which obviously
caused him some satisfaction. It was signed “Elmer
Ludgrove” and was written in a curiously neat and clerkly
hand. The contents of it were as follows:</p>

<blockquote><div>

  <p>“<span class="salutation">Dear Sir.</span>
  I should not venture to write to you, but for the
  fact that I know that you are as interested in the recent affair
  of the numbered counters as I am myself. I have recently come
  across, wholly by accident, certain curious facts which may
  serve to throw an entirely fresh light upon the deaths of six
  men, which, to my mind, have not yet been satisfactorily
  explained. I am not anxious to approach the police, at least
  until I have consulted you. The police, as is perhaps
  natural, could scarcely be expected to welcome disclosures which
  would completely upset their official theory. They believe, as
  I confess I did at one time myself, that the late Mr. Copperdock
  was guilty, and that his mania finally culminated in his own
  suicide.</p>

  <p>“If I am correct in my deductions from the new evidence
  which has come into my hands, I can prove beyond question
  that Mr. Copperdock was innocent, indeed, that he himself
  fell a victim to the agency which committed the other murders.
  I must ask you to respect my confidence until you have allowed
  me to put my evidence before you. When this has been done, I
  shall ask your advice as to the best means of laying it before
  the authorities. You, I have reason to believe, are on friendly
  terms with Inspector Hanslet, and perhaps you will agree,
  when you have examined the evidence I shall put before you, that
  it will be best to call him into consultation.</p>

  <p>“I suggest, as the various exhibits to which I shall be
  compelled to refer are at present at my house, and as it may
  be necessary for me to point out to you certain peculiarities of
  the locations in which the murders took place, that your
  examination be carried out there. As I believe that as little
  time as possible should be wasted, I suggest, if it meets with
  your approval, that you should do me the honour of calling
  upon me this evening. As, in the light of recent events, you may
  not care to come to Praed Street alone, I propose to call upon
  you after your dinner this evening, and to learn your wishes in
  the matter. If you agree to my suggestion, we can then walk to
  my house together. I am, sir, yours faithfully,</p>

  <p class="signature">“Elmer Ludgrove”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>The Professor read this letter through twice. His final
conclusion was that this man Ludgrove had in some way
discovered that the dead men had all been members of
the Morlandson jury. After all, he knew from the Black
Sailor’s words that Ludgrove had made inconvenient
enquiries, and it was possible that he had somehow stumbled
upon the truth. Anyway, there could be no harm in going
to see him and hearing what he had to say. Besides, he
had never conveyed to him the Black Sailor’s warning.
Hanslet might have, but the Professor, who had
penetrated the ill-concealed scepticism of the Inspector,
considered this unlikely. In any case, by comparing notes
with this man, who had been living in Praed Street
throughout the period of the murders, he might derive
a hint which would lead him to his goal.</p>

<p>For Dr. Priestley, although he appeared to have put
the whole affair out of his mind, was in fact determined
to find the solution of the problem. He felt that so far
the part he had played had been a distinctly ignominious
one. Both his theory of the motive of the crimes and his
account of his meeting with the Black Sailor had been
disregarded. And although Dr. Priestley affected to regard
his excursions into the solution of criminal problems with
half-amused tolerance, his ill-success hitherto in this
instance was a secret, but none the less bitter, blow to his
pride.</p>

<p>Yes, he would certainly go to see this man Ludgrove.
His letter showed him to be a man above the ordinary
standard of education of people in his position. Hanslet
had spoken of him as a man of considerable intelligence.
The Professor, considering the matter, felt that he might
well have got into touch with him before. He began to
think that he had been too ready to rely upon the police
descriptions of the events which had taken place, and had
neglected an alternative source of information which
might contain many details of value. And, his determination
made, the Professor fidgeted all day until, having
hurried through dinner and found himself in his study
earlier than usual, he could expect his visitor.</p>

<p>Mary had been instructed to show him straight in, and,
when he was at length announced, the Professor rose
at once to greet him. Mr. Ludgrove, seen for the first
time, was certainly an imposing and dignified figure.
His snowy white hair and beard gave him a patriarchal
appearance, produced an almost severe impression, which
was only modified by the kindly smile which habitually
hovered at the corner of his mouth. His eyes were
screened by his powerful spectacles, but one guessed them
to be direct and piercing in their expression.</p>

<p>“I am delighted to meet you, Mr. Ludgrove,” said
the Professor warmly. “Yes, I am Dr. Priestley, and this
is my secretary, Mr. Merefield. I received your letter,
and am much obliged to you for your suggestion, which
I shall be very glad to fall in with.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Dr. Priestley, you are very kind,” replied
Mr. Ludgrove, in his deep and pleasant voice. The
Professor glanced at him in astonishment. Neither the voice
nor the intonation were such as he would have expected
of a herbalist in Praed Street.</p>

<p>“It is a beautiful evening,” continued Mr. Ludgrove.
“Shall we walk to my house, or would you prefer to call
a taxi? I know that the vicinity of Praed Street has a
bad reputation as a result of these deaths, but although,
as you probably know, I received a numbered counter
some weeks ago, I have so far come to no harm. You
need have no apprehensions once we reach my house.
The police still display considerable concern for my
safety.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove smiled, and even the Professor’s set
features relaxed a little. “I am not afraid to walk to
Praed Street, especially in your company, Mr. Ludgrove,”
he replied.</p>

<p>“And coming back?” persisted the herbalist. “I fear
I have no telephone, and it may take me some minutes
to find you a cab. I should be happy to walk back here
with you.”</p>

<p>The Professor made an impatient gesture. “Believe
me, Mr. Ludgrove, I am no more afraid of Praed Street
than you are. If you insist upon walking home with me,
I shall be very glad of your company. If not, I am
perfectly capable of taking care of myself.”</p>

<p>“It will be late, I am afraid, that is, if you have the
patience to listen to me for so long,” replied Mr.
Ludgrove. “I shall be compelled to inflict upon you a long
and possibly tedious tale. However, you shall decide how
much of it you wish to listen to.”</p>

<p>“I am usually considered a good listener,” said
the Professor. “Shall we walk to your house, Mr.
Ludgrove?”</p>

<p>The herbalist assenting, they left the house and walked
down Westbourne Terrace together. Mr. Ludgrove’s shop
was scarcely half a mile away, and they covered the
distance in a few minutes, conversing about anything but
the matter uppermost in their thoughts. The Professor
found Mr. Ludgrove a most entertaining companion,
and found himself wondering what such a man was doing
to be compelled to keep a shop in such an odd
neighbourhood.</p>

<p>They walked down Praed Street without adventure,
and Mr. Ludgrove unlocked the door of his shop with
his latchkey. They passed through it into the inner room,
the window of which was already curtained and the gas
lighted. Dr. Priestley cast a swift glance round it, noting
with interest the scientific instruments on the bench, the
cases full of books, and two comfortable armchairs.
“This is a very comfortable room of yours, Mr.
Ludgrove,” he remarked approvingly.</p>

<p>“It has heard some queer stories in its time,” replied
Mr. Ludgrove with a smile. “You can form no idea of the
extraordinary confessions which some of my clients force
me to listen to. But I can assure you that it has heard
nothing more amazing that the story which I am about
to unfold to you this evening.”</p>

<p>“May I ask a question before you begin, Mr.
Ludgrove?” said the Professor quietly.</p>

<p>“Certainly, pray ask as many as you please,” replied
Mr. Ludgrove with a smile.</p>

<p>“How did you learn of my interest in this affair? So
far as I am aware, it is not common property.”</p>

<p>“I am afraid that Inspector Hanslet was indiscreet,”
replied Mr. Ludgrove. “When he first took over the case,
he came here and had a long talk with me. He said then
that he would put the facts before one whose powers of
deduction were unrivalled. When I next saw him, he
happened to mention your name, which I already knew as
that of the boldest and most enterprising scientist of the
age. It required very little intelligence on my part to
infer that you would be interested in these extraordinary
happenings, and that you were scarcely likely to accept
the official explanation of them.”</p>

<p>“I see,” said the Professor. “Well, as it happens, your
inference is correct. I am greatly interested, and I have a
theory of my own as to the motive for the murders, which
the police have been pleased to reject. I am all the more
anxious to hear the evidence you have to put before me.
There is still one more point in which I am interested.
I am informed that, sometime before his death, Mr.
Copperdock reported that he had met an individual known
as the Black Sailor. Upon this being reported to you, you
stated that you happened to have Mr. Copperdock under
observation at the moment when he stated the meeting
took place, and that no Black Sailor was present. Is this
correct?”</p>

<p>“I can assure you, Dr. Priestley, that at that moment
there was nobody in sight but Mr. Copperdock and
myself,” replied Mr. Ludgrove simply.</p>

<p>“Thank you,” said the Professor. “Now, I am prepared
to examine the evidence you have to show me.”</p>

<p>Mr. Ludgrove rose from his chair. “Will you excuse
me for a few minutes, Dr. Priestley?” he said. “Before
I begin my explanation, I should like to fetch certain
things which I have put in a place of security upstairs.
I will not keep you very long.”</p>

<p>He passed into the shop as he spoke, and the Professor
could hear the sound of his footsteps as he climbed the
stairs. The Professor, left alone in the room, proceeded
to examine the titles of the books in the shelves. They
were mainly botanical works, such as one might expect
to find in the library of a herbalist. But here and there
among them were a few volumes of general scientific
interest. Dr. Priestley smiled as he saw, lying
inconspicuously at the end of one of the shelves, a work he had
published a year or so before, <i>Fact and Fallacy</i>. No doubt
this had given Ludgrove the cue to his own interest in a
problem so intricate as that of the Praed Street murders.</p>

<p>Lying next to it was a book bearing the name of an
author well-known in the scientific world, which the
Professor had never heard of. He took it up and began to
turn over the pages with interest. His eye caught a
passage dealing with one of the subtler mathematical
problems raised by a particular aspect of relativity. He
became absorbed in this, forgetting all about Mr.
Ludgrove and his promised demonstration. So he remained
for several minutes, until he had read the passage from
beginning to end. Then, all at once, he became conscious
that he was no longer alone in the room, that somebody
was standing just inside the door, awaiting his pleasure.
The Professor laid the book down, and turned on his
heel, an apology upon his lips. But the words died in his
throat, and he stood for an instant staring at the figure
with unbelieving eyes.</p>

<p>It was the Black Sailor.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch21">

<h2>Chapter XXI. <br/> An Explanation</h2>

<p>The Professor’s first startled thought concerned the
manner in which the man had entered the room. He had heard
no sound of his entry, and he remembered that Mr.
Ludgrove had been careful to lock the door of the shop when
they had come in together. His second was a sudden thrust
of anxiety for Mr. Ludgrove’s safety. In the complete
silence of the little room, into which no sound penetrated
but the faint low rumble of the traffic outside, he listened
for the sound of his footsteps above. But, even to his keen
ears, the house seemed as quiet as the grave.</p>

<p>It was the Black Sailor who broke the silence. “Sit
down, Dr. Priestley,” he said gravely. “I have much to
say to you. You will recall that this is our second
meeting.”</p>

<p>But Dr. Priestley took a step forward, and stared into
the man’s face, at his jet-black beard and hair, at the scar
which gleamed angrily upon his cheek. He wore a woollen
cap, drawn over his face, and a blue pilot coat over his
jersey. But for these details, he was dressed as he had
been when the Professor had met him upon the Isle of
Purbeck. And the tones of his rasping voice sent a thrill
of fear through even the Professor’s determined heart.</p>

<p>“How did you get in here? Where is Mr. Ludgrove?”
The Professor found his voice at last.</p>

<p>“Mr. Ludgrove is dead,” replied the Black Sailor,
almost gently. “Surely you remember the warning I gave
you when we last met? Mr. Ludgrove, the herbalist of
Praed Street, is dead. Nobody on this side of the grave
will ever see him again. But you shall not be disappointed,
Dr. Priestley. He was to have explained to you many
things that seemed obscure, but were in reality very
simple. It is only fitting that I should take his place.”</p>

<p>And then at last the Professor understood. Perhaps
it was some note in the man’s voice that gave him the
clue. The solution was so simple that he could have
laughed aloud at his own lack of perception. “You are
Mr. Ludgrove,” he said simply.</p>

<p>The Black Sailor laughed quietly, and the laugh and
the voice in which he replied were those of the herbalist.
“So you have guessed at last, Dr. Priestley!” he
exclaimed. “Oh, but it was so simple! A little dye, which
could be applied or removed in a few minutes, a little
grease-paint for the scar, an artistic disarrangement of
my beard and hair, a change of clothing, and who would
recognize Mr. Ludgrove the herbalist? Still, the Black
Sailor was careful only to appear in the half light. His
disguise might have been penetrated under more searching
conditions. But I flatter myself that it is effective.”</p>

<p>The Professor, looking at the man, was forced to
agree. Even now that he knew, he found it difficult to
recognize the venerable Mr. Ludgrove with his well-kept,
snowy beard, his kindly smile, and his large spectacles, in
this wild-looking sailor with the fierce face and the tangled
black hair which seemed to cover it. The disguise was
undoubtedly effective, but—how simple!</p>

<p>“Mr. Ludgrove is dead. His mission is completed, and
you will never see him again,” continued the Black Sailor.
“Let us do his memory the justice of saying that he told
the truth. When Copperdock saw the Black Sailor, it
was perfectly correct for Ludgrove to say that he and
Copperdock were alone in the street. Ludgrove was the
Black Sailor that evening. But this is beside the point.
Pray sit down, Dr. Priestley, and we will enter upon the
explanation which I have to give you.”</p>

<p>Dr. Priestley’s mind had been working rapidly while
the man spoke, and it appeared that he had guessed
the Professor’s thoughts.</p>

<p>“Perhaps I should explain the conditions,” he
continued. “All the entrances to this room are securely
fastened. The door is locked, and, as you see, there is
a heavy curtain across it. The window is boarded up,
and there are no other openings. If you were to shout as
loud as you cared, no one could possibly hear you. Please
do not think I wish to threaten you, Dr. Priestley, but I
would point out that if you were so unwise as to attempt
personal violence, I am a very much more powerful man
than you, and I am armed. I am afraid that there is no
alternative for you but to listen to what I say. And after
that will come release. Now, surely you will sit down,
Dr. Priestley.”</p>

<p>The Professor, after a glance round the room,
perceived the helplessness of his position. The man was
clearly mad, but his mania was strictly limited. Upon
most subjects he was sane as he was himself. He must
perforce listen to what he had to say. Perhaps, during
the time which this would occupy, he might be able to
evolve a scheme for his capture. He walked across the
room and sat down in the chair which the Black Sailor
pointed out to him.</p>

<p>The man immediately took the chair opposite. “Artists
are naturally vain, Dr. Priestley,” he began, “and I think
my exploits entitle me to consider myself an artist. I have
long promised myself the pleasure of recounting them to
one who would appreciate their ingenuity, and you are
the very man for such a purpose. I have, I believe, read
everything that you have written, and I have understood
a nature which revels in ingenious methods. I flatter
myself that what I have to tell you will, at least, not
bore you.”</p>

<p>“I shall be extremely interested to hear it,” replied
the Professor quietly.</p>

<p>“Before Dr. Morlandson died, he furnished me with
a list of his intended victims, and a very fine collection
of lethal apparatus,” continued the Black Sailor. “My
first concern was to find some spot in London from which
to operate. I made careful enquiries as to the present
addresses of the surviving jurymen, and found that most
of them came from this part of London. This, of course,
was not Coincidence, since juries are frequently called by
districts.</p>

<p>“I therefore determined to establish myself in this
neighbourhood. I knew enough of the properties of herbs
to set myself up as a herbalist, and I was fortunate
enough to find this empty shop, almost opposite the
premises of one of my intended victims. Once in possession
of it, I set myself to develop a business which should
bring me into contact with all the gossip of the
neighbourhood, and to study the habits and circumstances of
my intended victims. My own apparent vocation I tried
to make as open as I could. My shop was available to
any who cared to enter it, and from the first I accustomed
the acquaintances which I made to my habit of spending
occasional week-ends in the country, and of taking a
walk every evening, since I foresaw that these would be
essential to my purpose. And in Mr. Copperdock I found
a simple and not over-intelligent personality who would
serve me admirably as a dupe upon whom suspicion
might be cast.</p>

<p>“You will, I think, understand the task which I had
been set. I was to execute the vengeance of Dr.
Morlandson upon the men who had condemned him to so many
years of agony. But this must be done in such a manner
that their deaths would not be attributed to pure chance,
but must eventually be made to appear as acts of justice,
as indeed they were. I could not employ the same methods
in each case, but at the same time I wished each death to
carry the same distinguishing mark.</p>

<p>“I was at first puzzled to think of any such mark.
And then, during a visit to Mr. Copperdock, the idea
came to me. I saw a box full of white bone counters lying
on his table, and I managed to appropriate a dozen or so
of these. At the same time I carefully noted the
envelopes he used in his business, and by a casual question
learnt where he had obtained them. I bought three
thousand of these, all the remaining stock, giving the name of
Mr. Copperdock. There was very little chance of their
being traced, but if they had been, the result of inquiries
would have shown that they had all been sold to the
tobacconist.</p>

<p>“I also discovered that the typewriter recently
purchased by Mr. Copperdock was a Planet, and I took
a careful note of the brand of pen and red ink he
habitually used. I next made enquiries among the
envelope addressing agencies, until I found one which
employed Planet machines. To this agency I sent my
envelopes, together with a telephone directory in which
I had marked some two thousand names, among which
were those of my intended victims who happened to have
a telephone. To this list I added one of my own,
containing a thousand additional names, among them the
jurymen I had not found in the telephone book. I instructed
the agency to type these names and addresses on the
envelopes. It was a safe assumption that a year later, when I
began operations, the agency would not remember having
typed the names of the dead men among so many
thousands of others. The counters I numbered myself, as
required.</p>

<p>“Last November, I felt myself in a position to seek
my first victim. I decided that it should be Mr. Tovey,
a personal friend of Mr. Copperdock, from whom I had
learnt all I required to know about his habits. I had,
among my other weapons, a paper cutter’s knife, with
half a dozen blades. These blades I had sharpened along
both edges until they resembled daggers, and I had
discovered a means of fixing them lightly into the handle,
so that they would remain in the wound, leaving me free
to carry off the handle.</p>

<p>“That evening, Mr. Ludgrove took his usual walk,
returning by way of Paddington station. From here he
telephoned to Mr. Tovey, giving him the message that
he was wanted at St. Martha’s. Mr. Ludgrove then
walked back here, and took on the character of the Black
Sailor. Behind this shop is a piece of ground which was
once a garden, and that in turn is separated by a low wall
from a yard, deserted after business hours, with gates
and also a small door leading into a back street. I had
made myself a key to the small door, and it provided
me with an alternative means of access to this house.</p>

<p>“The Black Sailor went out this way, waited in the
shadows at the corner of the back street until he saw
Mr. Tovey pass, then followed him and caught him up
among the crowd outside the Express Train. The knife
required no violence in its use, merely a firm push in
one of the spots which Dr. Morlandson had shown me.
The actual stabbing was a very simple matter, and the
Black Sailor disappeared in the crowd, to return here by
the way he went out and transform himself into Mr.
Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“But I realized that this method, although it had
served its purpose once, was inartistic and dangerous.
There was always the risk that the Black Sailor might
be recognized and traced back here. As a matter of
fact, Wal Snyder had noticed him, but his evidence was
discredited. The police, however, were compelled to offer
a reward for him, and I determined that the Black Sailor
must be reserved for special purposes.</p>

<p>“In the case of Mr. Colburn I adopted quite a
different method. I had become a customer of his, and had
encouraged his son to confide in me. From him I gradually
learnt his father’s habits and peculiarities, particularly
that of smoking a pipe in the shop after lunch, and, when
he had finished it, of refilling it and putting it away on a
shelf. I examined the pipe in young Colburn’s absence,
and noticed that it was cracked. That evening, I visited a
tobacconist at some distance from here and bought a pipe
of similar make and shape.</p>

<p>“Within a few days, as I had expected, I saw Mr.
Colburn enter Copperdock’s shop. It was a fair
assumption that he had gone in to buy a new pipe to replace
the old one, since I had learnt that his tobacco was
always delivered to him. I took a very small splinter of
glass, covered it with a preparation which Dr.
Morlandson had given me, and drove one end of it into a notch
I had made in the mouthpiece of the pipe I had bought.
I then went to Colburn’s shop, on an errand which
necessitated young Colburn’s going to the bakehouse and
leaving me alone. I saw, as I had expected, a new pipe
lying filled on the shelf. I substituted mine for it, put Mr.
Colburn’s pipe in my pocket, waited until young
Colburn came back with my purchase, and left the shop.
I was in the country when Mr. Colburn died, but I heard
the details later, as no doubt you have heard them, Dr.
Priestley.”</p>

<p>“Yes, the deaths of Colburn and Martin strengthened
my theory that Dr. Morlandson was at the bottom of
the affair,” replied the Professor calmly. “I guessed that
there was extensive medical knowledge behind both of
them.” His one idea was to prolong this recital as much
as possible.</p>

<p>“You will agree, however, that it would have been
impossible to trace Mr. Colburn’s death to me. By this
time I had come to the conclusion that it would be as well
to stage the scene of my executions as far as possible in
Praed Street. I wished to concentrate attention upon this
particular district, since I knew that the obvious effect
on the police would be to suggest to them an inhabitant
of it. As soon as they did this, I was ready to supply a
number of hints and inferences. I was thus able to
become on confidential terms with Whyland, and, by
making a friend of him, to put myself above suspicion. And
all the time I was influencing his mind in the direction of
Mr. Copperdock. It was a most interesting
psychological study, I can assure you.</p>

<p>“Pargent, whom I determined to tackle next, presented
an entirely different problem. He lived some distance
from Praed Street, and though I might have devised some
means of killing him in his own home, I was most
anxious to adhere to the rule I had laid down. It was not until
I had carefully considered his habits that I saw my way
clear. During the years which I had spent observing
my victims, I had discovered the regularity of his visits
to his sister at West Laverhurst. And in this regularity
I saw my opportunity.</p>

<p>“One Saturday morning, when he was due to go to
West Laverhurst, I went down from Waterloo to
Penderworth, for which the station is Wokingham, ostensibly
to collect plants. I went to Waterloo by way of
Paddington and the tube, the most obvious way of getting there.
But at Paddington I called at the booking-office, and took
a ticket to Reading. Having arrived at Penderworth, I
made myself as conspicuous as possible at the inn, in the
character of Mr. Ludgrove, and then went out with a
suit-case, with the declared intention of collecting plants.
In the suit-case were my dyes and paints, also a change
of clothing.</p>

<p>“Now, Penderworth is four miles from Reading, where
the train stopped by which Pargent habitually returned
home. I found a convenient coppice, in which I got myself
up as a man with iron grey beard and hair, and a
conspicuous mark upon my face. I left my suit-case in the
coppice, carefully hidden, and in it Mr. Ludgrove’s
clothes and spectacles. Then I walked to Reading and
caught the train in which Pargent was travelling. On
our arrival at Paddington I followed him through the
station, and was by his side when he made his dash
across Praed Street to catch the bus. My opportunity
came on the refuge, and I employed the same method
as I had done in the case of Tovey.</p>

<p>“I had ascertained that a train left for Reading ten
minutes after the arrival of the train by which I had
travelled up. I had just time to catch this—I already
had the ticket which I had purchased in the morning. As
the train neared Reading, I went to the lavatory and
removed the dye and paint. From here I stepped out on
to the platform and passed the barrier unremarked. Even
had I been noticed in London, and my description
circulated, I thus ran very little risk. The most noticeable
thing had been the ‘port-wine mark,’ and this of course
had vanished. I walked to the coppice, buried the clothes
I was wearing, resumed the apparel of Mr. Ludgrove, and
returned to the inn with my suit-case full of the first
plants I could lay my hands on. I had apparently an
excellent alibi.</p>

<p>“With the death of Pargent, the curious coincidence
that all three victims had received counters came to light,
as I had anticipated it would. I thought it wise to suspend
my operations for a while, while I prepared my plans for
dealing with the remainder of the surviving jurymen.
Goodwin presented the greatest puzzle. He was confined
to his house, almost to one room, and I despaired of
being able to reach him. I had nearly decided to leave
him alone, knowing that his death could not be delayed
very long in any case. But I had a sudden inspiration.
The numbered counters had attracted a good deal of
attention, and the sequel to their receipt was well known.
It was quite possible that Goodwin, to whom any shock
was likely to be fatal, would die as the mere result of
finding one in his post. I made the experiment, and it
was successful. But I claim no great credit for this
exploit. I might well have failed, had fortune not favoured
me, and I was compelled to abandon Praed Street as the
scene of his death. I have always considered that the
execution of Goodwin was not up to my usual standard.</p>

<p>“But I have omitted the case of Martin, upon which
I rather pride myself. Put yourself in my position, Dr.
Priestley. Here was a man, living in the suburbs, and
having an office in the City. How was I to lure him to Praed
Street, and ensure his death when he arrived there, at a
time when Praed Street had already gained notoriety as
the scene of three mysterious deaths? I knew quite a lot
about Martin, more than most people, in fact. I knew that
he had once been in business in Praed Street, and that
he had prospered there rather more rapidly than his
apparent business warranted. My connection among the
shadier classes in the neighbourhood helped me there.
I discovered, hint by hint, that he was a well-known fence,
a receiver of stolen goods, that is, Dr. Priestley, and that
discovery, coupled with the fact that the premises he
had once occupied were again changing hands, gave me
an idea.</p>

<p>“My first move was to make the acquaintance of the
builder who was carrying out the alterations to Number
407, and from him I learnt in the course of conversation
the name of the new tenant. He asked me to come and
look at the place, an invitation which I accepted without
too great a show of eagerness. In the next few days I
visited the place again, more than once. I wanted the
builder’s men to get accustomed to the sight of me. For
this purpose I was Mr. Ludgrove the local resident, of
course. As a matter of fact, most of the builder’s friends
went to have a look at the place. There is always an
interest in vacant premises in a street like this.</p>

<p>“Dr. Morlandson had provided me with a number of
celluloid capsules, containing pure prussic acid. I took
an ordinary electric lamp, broke it, and connected the
ends of the leading-in wires by a piece of fine foil, which
would become red hot on the passage of a current. Round
this I wrapped a few strands of nitrated cellulose, and
to this I fixed the celluloid capsule. The action of this
device was very simple. If a current were passed through
it, the cellulose would inflame and set fire to the capsule,
thus releasing the prussic acid. Some of the vapour of
this might catch fire, but enough would be left to be fatal
to anybody breathing it in a confined space. And I knew
of a confined space most suitably adapted to the purpose.</p>

<p>“I wrote a letter to Martin, which I knew could not
fail to bring him to Number 407, and to bring him alone.
It suggested that somebody had discovered his true
occupation, and was prepared to keep the matter secret,
for a consideration. Then, on the Saturday morning, just
before the men were due to leave, I walked openly into
Number 407. I had kept an eye on their habits, and knew
that before they left they packed away their tools in the
back room on the ground floor. I could hear them there
as I went in, and I made my way down to the cellar
without anybody noticing me. All I did there was to put my
poison device in the lamp holder in the small cellar—I
had heard the electrician tell the builder that the current
would be connected that day—hang the numbered counter
on the switch, and remove the string by which the swing
door could be pulled open from within. The trap was set,
it remained only to ensure that Martin should have easy
access to it.</p>

<p>“I knew about the arrangement whereby the keys were
kept at the sweet shop. I had announced that I was going
into the country that day, travelling into Essex by the
London, Tilbury and Southend from Fenchurch Street.
I took the Underground, apparently to Aldgate, but got
out at Aldersgate Street. From here I walked down the
Barbican, saw Martin leave his office, go to lunch, and
finally book at Aldersgate Street to Praed Street. I
immediately telephoned from one of the boxes there to Mr.
Briggs, who had the keys, saying that I was the tenant
of Number 407, and asking him to look out for a Mr.
Martin, and give him the keys. I then went on to
Fenchurch Street, spent a happy and profitable day in the
country, and returned home to hear of the death of Mr.
Martin. I was, I confess, slightly annoyed to find that it
had been attributed to suicide. But then, I had never
anticipated that Martin would bring an automatic with him.
But perhaps I weary you with these details, Dr.
Priestley?”</p>

<p>“Not in the least!” replied the Professor fervently. He
glanced furtively at the clock. It was already past ten
o’clock.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch22">

<h2>Chapter XXII. <br/> The Death Chamber</h2>

<p>“What I have to tell you now may interest you more
nearly, Dr. Priestley,” continued the Black Sailor.
“Having disposed of five of my intended victims, I had to
remove Copperdock. But I wished first of all to
concentrate as much suspicion as possible on him before his
death. You will perceive the idea, no doubt. If the
murders were to cease with Copperdock’s death, there being
already a vague suspicion that he had caused them,
further enquiries would not be pursued very briskly.</p>

<p>“For this reason, I appeared to Copperdock that
evening as he was coming out of the Cambridge Arms. The
disguise was very imperfect, since I had merely smeared
the dye on my beard in the street, and the scar was made
of sticking-plaster. It would not have borne a moment’s
close inspection, but it was good enough for Copperdock,
as I felt sure it would be. I escaped from him without
difficulty, and, having taken a wet sponge with me,
removed the scar and dye at the first opportunity and came
quietly home. I beat Mr. Copperdock by about five
minutes.</p>

<p>“As I had expected, he told Whyland the story of
his adventure, and I was in a position to swear that he
and I had been alone in the street. The result was to
discredit his veracity still further. I then thought it time
to act. You will remember that Copperdock said he found
a numbered counter on his bed? That was the exact truth,
although it seemed impossible, and nobody believed him.
But it was capable of the simplest explanation in the
world. Look here.”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor rose from his chair, and walked across
to the bench, from which he picked up an apparatus
made of wood and india rubber, not unlike a miniature
cross-bow. “I amused myself in my spare time by making
this,” he said. “As you see, it has a holder which just
takes a counter. You would be surprised to see how far
and how accurately it will project it. I have frequently
practised with it in the country, and I have attained
sufficient skill in its use to be able to place a counter where
I like at any range up to a hundred feet or so.</p>

<p>“Now, above my shop is a room, which I use for
storage purposes. From the window of this room you can see
into the window of Mr. Copperdock’s bedroom. I had
merely to wait for a windless evening, fine enough for
Mr. Copperdock to leave his window open, and seize my
opportunity when I knew his house was empty. The
opportunity came, and I took it.</p>

<p>“It might have been thought that by delivering the
counter in advance I had increased my difficulties. But,
on the contrary, I had diminished them. The obvious
improbability of Mr. Copperdock’s story, that he had
found a counter on his bed at a time when it was
demonstrable that nobody had entered the house, was merely
another link in the chain of suspicion which I was
forging round him. I allowed a few days to pass, and then,
the following Saturday, I took the final step.</p>

<p>“Now, even you, Dr. Priestley, failed to read the
riddle of the broken hypodermic needle and the
incrustation of potassium carbonate round the puncture. Yet
it was ridiculously simple. I secured a piece of metallic
potassium, and moulded it into the shape of a bullet to
fit an air-gun which I possessed. Into the head of this
bullet I inserted the broken end of a hypodermic needle,
which I had already charged with the same drug as had
been so effectual in the case of Mr. Colburn. Keeping
this prepared bullet in paraffin, to avoid oxidation, I
placed the air-gun ready upstairs, and waited for Mr.
Copperdock’s return from the Cambridge Arms. He
brought two friends home with him, and I was afraid at
first that I should be compelled to postpone my attempt.
It was essential to my scheme that he should be alone in
the house when I fired the gun.</p>

<p>“However, the two friends left after a while, and Mr.
Copperdock entered his bedroom and proceeded to
undress. I could just see the washing-stand through a gap
in his curtains, and I waited until he was bending over
this. Then I loaded the gun with my potassium bullet,
and pulled the trigger. I saw Mr. Copperdock spin round,
and then he passed out of my line of vision. But I knew
I had succeeded, and I came quietly down here.</p>

<p>“The bullet had possessed sufficient velocity to drive
the needle well into Mr. Copperdock’s body, and I knew
I could trust it to destroy its own evidence. I need
scarcely explain the properties of metallic potassium to
you, Dr. Priestley. On exposure to the air it oxidizes,
as you know, first to the hydroxide, which is caustic
potash, and then to the carbonate. The doctor who was
called in quite correctly stated that the presence of the
carbonate showed that caustic potash had been applied.
But he never guessed that the caustic potash had itself
been derived from potassium.</p>

<p>“I had expected that Ted Copperdock’s first act upon
discovering his father’s body would be to call me. I
thought that this would furnish me with an opportunity
for adding yet another mystification for the police to
solve. I placed a numbered counter on my own mantelpiece,
and waited. Sure enough, young Copperdock came
across to me. I met him in the shop, and we went over
together, I taking care not to close the door behind us.
I have no doubt that the scene in Mr. Copperdock’s
room had been described to you in detail. But there is
one incident which seems to have escaped everybody’s
recollection. I was left alone in the room while Ted went
for the doctor and Waters telephoned to Inspector
Whyland.</p>

<p>“I had meant all along to contrive to be alone in the
room sooner or later, and was prepared for the opportunity.
I had in my pocket the handle of the paper-maker’s
knife and one of the blades. I placed the handle in Mr.
Copperdock’s right hand, and pressed the fingers round
it. Then I put the blade and handle in the pocket of one
of his overcoats, satisfied that sooner or later it would
be found there, with his finger-prints upon it. A few
minutes later, a chance remark of Inspector Whyland’s
gave me a further idea. If the suicide theory were correct,
the hypodermic syringe ought to be found. I had, I
confess, overlooked this point, but it was readily rectified.
Directly he left me, I looked out an old syringe, fitted
the other half of the needle to it, and dropped it by the
side of the road under Mr. Copperdock’s window. Waters
found it within half an hour.</p>

<p>“Meanwhile, Inspector Whyland had returned here at
my suggestion. He was the very witness I required to
my finding of the counter. The door left open afforded
an obvious suggestion of the means by which it had
reached my mantelpiece. I did not care what theory he
evolved as to the identity of the person who had entered
the house. My only object was to confuse the issue as
much as possible.</p>

<p>“Then, Dr. Priestley, Inspector Hanslet came upon
the scene, and I knew that the real battle of wits had
begun. As I have told you, I had spent years studying
the characters of the members of the jury, and among
them I had devoted a large part of my time to observing
you. I soon discovered that Inspector Hanslet consulted
you upon his principal cases, and I knew as soon as
Hanslet appeared, that I was at last pitted against the
most acute brain in England. I may say, without
exaggeration, that the knowledge gave me the keenest
pleasure which I had known for years.”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor paused, and smiled at his auditor
benignly. “You see, Dr. Priestley,” he continued, “I was
in rather a delicate position, where you were concerned.
I had purposely left you until the last, because, as
foreman of the jury, Dr. Morlandson wished you to have
special treatment. You were to be warned, but your fate
was to be left hanging over your head as long as possible.
I was afraid that you would not attach much importance
to the mere receipt of a counter. You are not the sort
of person to be so easily frightened. Yet how to deliver
a personal warning without giving you a clue which
would be fatal to the execution of my design, I could not
see.</p>

<p>“I knew Inspector Hanslet had discussed the Praed
Street murders with you. Or rather, in deference to your
well-known insistence upon exactitude, I will say that
I believed it to be in the highest degree probable. During
one of my evening walks, accompanied, I may say, by
one of Inspector Whyland’s charming young men, I
passed your house, and saw Inspector Hanslet enter it.
It was rather more than a mere guess to infer that he,
who had just taken charge of the case, was about to
consult you upon it.</p>

<p>“Then, a day or two later, I saw in <i>The Times</i> the
announcement of your hurried departure to Australia.
Believe me, Dr. Priestley, I had a higher opinion of your
courage than to imagine that you had hastened to seek
a place of safety. I reasoned, and events proved that I
reasoned correctly, that you alone had connected the
names of the dead men with those who had served on the
jury at Dr. Morlandson’s trial. You were therefore aware
that your own life was threatened. But one thing puzzled
you. If Dr. Morlandson were dead, how could the
murders be accounted for? You would naturally wish to
verify his death upon the spot, but you would endeavour
to do so with the utmost secrecy. Hence, I thought, the
announcement of your visit to Australia, which would
mislead your antagonist, and account for your absence
from London. The place in which to find you alone was
obviously the Isle of Purbeck.</p>

<p>“So I suggested a scheme to Inspector Whyland, and
here my chance thought of delivering a counter to myself
came in useful. I was to go to Dorchester for the
week-end—I was thankful for the evidence I had already laid
that the fatal period and place were the week-end and
Praed Street—and he was to remain here on the watch
for the assassin who threatened me. It amused me to
think that the solution of the whole mystery would lie
under his very eyes, for the cross-bow was on that bench,
and the air-gun stands in a rack in my bedroom. But,
since I had invited him, I knew that he would attach no
importance to these things, even if he noticed them. I left
him in possession, and went to Dorchester. But from
there I took a train to Wareham, and walked across the
heath to Dr. Morlandson’s cottage, where I most
artistically converted Mr. Ludgrove into the Black Sailor.</p>

<p>“You must remember that I lived on that heath for
a year, during Dr. Morlandson’s lifetime. I have been
there frequently since. There is a disused clay working
not far from the cottage, and in this I had secreted a
number of useful articles, among them a bicycle. With
this I watched in the heather, feeling certain that you
would not disappoint me. You did not, and our most
interesting interview took place.</p>

<p>“After you had started for home, I made my preparations
for departure. It was just possible that you would
set the local police on my track, and I was taking no
risks. I rolled a round and heavy stone over the path,
which gave the sand a level and untrodden appearance,
and effectually removed all traces of my bicycle. Then
I walked to a spot on the shores of Newton Bay, where
I knew that a punt, which is very rarely used, was drawn
up. In this I rowed across through the backwaters to a
point on the Wareham channel above Lake. I left the
punt here, turned myself back again into Mr. Ludgrove,
and in the morning walked to Hamworthy Junction,
whence I caught a train to Dorchester. I was in plenty of
time to dig my colchicum bulbs and return to London.</p>

<p>“Now, Dr. Priestley, I feel that I owe you some apology.
Matters have turned out very differently from what
I had expected, owing to circumstances over which I have
no control. I had intended that you should survive for
months, even perhaps years, in daily expectation of
death leaping out at you from some unexpected corner.
You are a determined man, but I think you will agree
that even your iron will would have broken down at last
under the strain. Every now and then, when you were
most absorbed in your labours, a warning would reach
you, a hint that the sands were running out, that you
might not be allowed time even to finish the immediate
task. I think in time you would have known something
of the horror of despair which grips the innocent man
condemned ruthlessly and without mercy, as you
condemned Dr. Morlandson, Dr. Priestley.”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor’s voice had become harsh and
menacing, and the Professor started from his chair to meet
the attack which he anticipated. But the Black Sailor
waved him back again with an imperious gesture.</p>

<p>“Sit down, Dr. Priestley!” he commanded. “I have
not yet finished what I must say and you must hear.
You need fear no violence, unless you attempt to escape
from this room. But you are far too sensible to make any
such attempt, which, as you see, would be futile. I could
overpower you in an instant, and I should then be
compelled to bind you hand and foot and gag you. A most
humiliating situation for you, Dr. Priestley, and one
uncomfortably reminiscent of the methods of the
hangman, to whose care you delivered Dr. Morlandson, you
remember.”</p>

<p>The Professor sank back into his chair. He realized
that the Black Sailor was right, that in any struggle he
must inevitably be overcome, and resistance would
probably lead to his immediate death. If he were to leave
this room alive, it must be by strategy rather than force.
It was unthinkable that the Black Sailor would release
him now that he had confessed the full details of his
murderous campaign. He could only bide his time, seeking
some means of extricating himself from this desperate
situation. But what did the man mean by his assurance
that he would employ no violence?</p>

<p>Meanwhile the Black Sailor had continued, in the deep,
pleasant voice which had been one of the most striking
attributes of Mr. Ludgrove.</p>

<p>“This is the vengeance which I had planned for you,
Dr. Priestley. But, unfortunately, my plans have been
thwarted. Long ago, when Dr. Morlandson was alive,
he warned me that, well set up and healthy as I appeared
to be, my heart was affected by organic disease. He told
me frankly that it might be many years before it seriously
affected my health, and that, with reasonable care, I
might expect to attain the average term of years. But
at the same time he warned me that my trouble might at
any time become acute, and he described to me the
symptoms which would be my signal to prepare for death.</p>

<p>“Those symptoms developed last week, Dr. Priestley,
and I knew that I had only a short while longer to live.
But I was determined not to die leaving the vengeance
which had been bequeathed to me unaccomplished. I had
sworn to be the instrument of justice upon those who had
destroyed Dr. Morlandson’s life, for that life had been
destroyed just as surely as though his original sentence
had been carried out. And of those who had incurred the
guilt, only you remained, Dr. Priestley.</p>

<p>“I could have shot you in your own house, and then
turned the weapon upon myself. In any case I am to die
very shortly, and I much prefer death at my own hands
and under my own control to the anxious waiting for the
uncertain hand of nature. It would have been the easiest
way, perhaps, but it was not in accordance with the
methods which I had so carefully developed. How much more
fitting it would be that you should die in Praed Street, that
your death should be the culminating point in the history
of the murders in Praed Street! I believed that it
could be done, and I set myself to work out the details.</p>

<p>“The police, as you are aware, have rather lost interest
in you and me. The discovery of the knife in Mr.
Copperdock’s coat pocket seems finally to have convinced them
that the secret died with him, and, whatever the secret
might have been, no further murders were to be
anticipated. Detectives are busy people, they have no time to
spare for academic research. I am sure that they are
convinced that no actual danger menaces either Dr.
Priestley or Mr. Ludgrove, although both of them are known
to have received numbered counters. They were not
likely to interfere with my schemes.</p>

<p>“You are aware of the steps which I took to bring you
here. Had you refused to accompany me this evening,
I should have shot you outright in your own study. But
I knew that you would not refuse. The solution of the
mystery had become a point of honour with you, and,
besides, you had a message for me which I was sure that
you would be glad of the opportunity to deliver. Surely
you would not have hesitated to give the innocent Mr.
Ludgrove the Black Sailor’s message, Dr. Priestley?”</p>

<p>The Professor forced a smile. “I had intended to do so,
but—he died, to use your own expression, before I had
the opportunity.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that was unfortunate,” agreed the Black Sailor
pleasantly. “But still, the fact that you had the message
to deliver served its purpose. It was an added inducement
to you to accept my invitation. And, by carefully
emphasizing the possible danger which lurked in Praed Street,
I worked upon your pride. You would not have refused
to come with me, after that. And I told you the truth,
I had revelations to make which I knew would interest
you, and I think you have not been disappointed.”</p>

<p>He paused for a moment, and then continued, a sinister
purpose in his voice: “And now the end has come. It is
not the end I sought, but I welcome it as well as any
other. We two will pass out of this world together, Dr.
Priestley, you the last victim of my justice, and I the
executioner. It is but anticipating my own death for
a short time, and the means I shall employ will render
even deeper the mystery which surrounds me. On
Sunday morning the world will hear of two more strange
deaths in Praed Street. I think your secretary will come
round here before the night is over, and, being able to
obtain no reply, will call in the police to his aid. How
much of the riddle will they solve, I wonder?”</p>

<p>The Black Sailor stretched out his hand, and switched
on a small electric hand-lamp which stood on a table
by his side. “That will give us sufficient light for our
purpose,” he said sombrely. Then, before the Professor
could guess his intention, he suddenly leapt from his
chair, turned out the gas which was burning at a bracket
by the mantelpiece, and with a powerful wrench tore the
bracket itself from the wall. It fell with a crash into the
fire-place.</p>

<p>Then the Professor understood. He, too, leapt from his
chair with a shout, and dashed blindly for the door. But
the Black Sailor was there before him. “It is useless,
Dr. Priestley,” he said menacingly. “The door is fastened
securely, as is the window. The chimney is blocked, and
there is no possible escape for us. I doubt if you would
be heard if you call again for help, but I cannot risk it.
Will you give me your word to wait quietly, or must I
gag you and tie you up? Would you care to meet death
bound like a criminal, Dr. Priestley?”</p>

<p>For a moment the two men stood face to face, the
powerful form of the Black Sailor towering threateningly
over the Professor. Behind them, with a faint hissing
sound, the gas poured into the room through the broken
bracket. Already the pungent smell of it caught Dr.
Priestley by the throat.</p>

<p>And then, suddenly, the idea came to him. It was a
forlorn, desperate hope, a scheme almost as dangerous
as waiting supinely for the fatal vapours to overpower
him. Yet—it was worth trying. He nodded his head
almost briskly. “I will not call for help,” he said, and,
turning on his heel, he sat down again in the chair he
had just quitted.</p>

<p>The Black Sailor followed his example, and so the two
sat in silence, waiting, waiting. The atmosphere of the
room grew thick and heavy, difficult to breathe. The
Professor found his thoughts floating away to trifling
things, he imagined himself a boy again, at school— With
a mighty effort of will he recalled them, forcing his mind
to concentrate upon the thing he had to do. Yet, was it
worth it? Death, in that comfortable chair, would be
so easy. A pleasant languor crept over him. He had only
to close his eyes and sleep——</p>

<p>Again his will triumphed. He must wait a few seconds
longer, wait till the whole room was full of gas. But could
he, dare he? His senses were slipping away fast. Yet he
must retain consciousness, if only for those few seconds.
The Black Sailor was glaring at him with baleful eyes,
eyes that suddenly seemed familiar, as though they stared
out at him from the past, many, many years ago. Where
had he seen those eyes before?</p>

<p>The Professor’s strength and energy were failing him
fast. He knew that, even if the Black Sailor offered no
opposition, he could not reach the broken pipe and stop
the rush of the gas. He felt his muscles failing him, his
brain refusing to struggle any longer against the luxurious
sleep which enticed it. He must make his effort now,
before he yielded to that sweet, enthralling sleep which
could know no awakening.</p>

<p>Stealthily he felt in his pockets, forcing his reluctant
fingers to their work. Then, even as the Black Sailor
struggled to his feet, and stood there swaying dizzily,
the Professor slid to the floor, and struck the match which
he held in his hand. There was a roar as of the heavens
opening, a bright, scorching sea of flame, and the
Professor knew no more.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch23">

<h2>Chapter XXIII. <br/> The Will</h2>

<p>He came to himself slowly and confusedly. A strong light
was glaring into his eyes, and he could hear voices, voices
which he did not recognize, all about him. He seemed to
be lying on the floor, his shoulders supported in
somebody’s arms.</p>

<p>Gradually he began to distinguish words and sentences.
“This one’s coming round, I believe.” “All right, the
doctor’ll be here in a minute.” “T’other one’s gone, I’m
afraid. I can’t feel his pulse at all.” “Here, help me to
clear this plaster off him, somebody. The explosion seems
to have brought the ceiling down. It’s a wonder it didn’t
blow the roof off. Have you got that gas turned off at the
main yet?” “Ah, here’s the doctor. Been a bit of a smash
here, doctor. Gas explosion, from what I can see of it.
Two hurt, one of ’em killed, I fancy. Take this one first,
will you?”</p>

<p>The Professor saw a face peering into his own. “Well,
my friend, what’s happened to you? Blown up, eh? Let’s
have a look at you. Any bones broken? Doesn’t look like
it. Can you move your legs? Good. Any pain anywhere?”</p>

<p>“No. I was stunned, I think, when the explosion took
place.” Dr. Priestley’s senses were returning rapidly. The
whole scene flashed back to him, the feeble glimmer of
the little hand-lamp, the figure of the Black Sailor,
formidable, immense, swaying towards him——</p>

<p>Before the supporting arms could prevent him, he had
struggled to his feet. Something about his head felt
unfamiliar, and he passed his hand over it. Every particle
of hair had disappeared. He was bald, clean-shaven,
without eyebrows or eyelashes.</p>

<p>“Steady, steady,” came a voice soothingly. “We’ll soon
get you out of this. Here, sit down in this chair, or what
remains of it.”</p>

<p>He let himself be guided to the chair. The outlines of
the room, illuminated by the rays of two or three bulls-eye
lanterns, began to be visible to him. He hardly recognized
it. Everything it had contained was swept into inextricable
confusion, as though a tornado had passed through it.
Where the window had been was a square of dim grey
light, the distant reflection of a street lamp. A whitish
gritty dust covered everything, the debris of the fallen
ceiling. And stretched out in front of the fireplace was the
dim outline of a man’s figure, prone and motionless.</p>

<p>One of the men in the room came up to him. “Feeling
better, eh? Narrow shave you’ve had, I should say. Do
you remember who you are?”</p>

<p>“I am Dr. Priestley, of Westbourne Terrace,” replied
the Professor.</p>

<p>The man gave a low whistle of incredulity. “Dr.
Priestley? Well, you don’t look it.”</p>

<p>“I have letters in my pocket which will serve to identify
me,” replied the Professor shortly.</p>

<p>He put his hand in his pocket and produced a packet
of papers. The man took them, glanced through them and
handed them back. “I beg your pardon, sir,” he said
respectfully. “But—I didn’t know you without your hair,
and with your face blackened like that. Perhaps you could
tell us who this is, sir?”</p>

<p>He flashed his lamp upon the features of the figure
lying upon the floor. The Professor leant forward in his
chair and gazed at them in silence. This man, too, was
hairless as he was himself, as though he had been shaved
by some expert barber. Beneath the grime which covered
his face, beneath the lines which age and suffering had
graven upon him, the Professor recognized the features
which had graven themselves upon his memory so many
years ago. He saw again the prisoner in the dock, the
handsome clean-shaven face with its look of awful
anxiety. And he knew where he had seen before those eyes
which had stared into his before he had lost
consciousness.</p>

<p>“That is Dr. Morlandson,” he replied gravely.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Dr. Priestley was removed to Westbourne Terrace, at
his own urgent request, but it was a couple of days
before his doctor would allow him to receive visitors. He
was pretty badly shaken, and the poison which he had
inhaled was having its usual after effects. But his brain
was as active as ever, and he insisted that Hanslet, who
had been waiting with what patience he could summon,
should be admitted without further delay.</p>

<p>“Well, sir, you seem to have been right as usual,” he
said. “But I don’t profess to begin to understand,
although I have a document here which clears up a good
many points. If you feel well enough, I should be very
glad if you would tell me what happened in that room.
I’ve arranged for the inquest on this Dr. Morlandson to
be adjourned until you are well enough to attend. As a
matter of fact, I don’t see how an inquest is going to be
held at all. There’s been one already, on the same man,
at Corfe Castle, years ago.”</p>

<p>The Professor told his story as simply as possible,
outlining his actions and repeating the Black Sailor’s story,
up to the moment when it had occurred to him that his
only chance of escape was to produce an explosion. “It
could not make things any worse, as far as I was
concerned,” he said. “I was bound to be overcome by the
gas in a very few minutes. But I had to wait until I
judged the mixture of gas and air to be correct, and I
was very doubtful whether this would take place before
I became unconscious. I guessed that I should feel the
force of the explosion least by lying on the floor, and, as
it proved, that saved me. Morlandson, who was standing
up when the explosion took place, bore the full brunt of
it, and it killed him.”</p>

<p>“Well, it’s a most extraordinary case altogether,”
replied Hanslet, as the Professor concluded his account.
“This man Morlandson, or Ludgrove as we called him,
displayed the most amazing ingenuity, and there was no
reason why we should ever have suspected him, any more
than we suspected anybody else in the neighbourhood.
And the way he gradually concentrated our attention on
poor Copperdock was masterly.</p>

<p>“No doubt you will like to hear our side of the story.
It’s fairly simple. About ten minutes before midnight the
constable on duty outside Ludgrove’s shop heard a terrific
crash and a noise of breaking glass. He hammered at the
door, and, getting no reply, had the sense to make his way
round to the back, eventually reaching the place by much
the same route as the Black Sailor used, according to
what you have just told me. He found the window blown
out of the back room, a terrible mess inside, and a jet of
burning gas coming out of the broken bracket. He blew
his whistle, and by the time that two or three of our
fellows had got inside, you came to, Professor.</p>

<p>“Of course, when I heard that you had identified the
dead man as Dr. Morlandson, I thought you were still
dizzy with the shock. We couldn’t make out who he was;
he was dressed as a sailor, but we couldn’t recognize his
face, black and with all the hair burnt off. It couldn’t
be Ludgrove, yet, if it wasn’t, what had become of the old
herbalist?</p>

<p>“We next set to work to search the house. The first
thing we found, lying on the dressing table, was a most
interesting document, which I should like you to read,
Professor. It was in a sealed envelope, addressed ‘To all
whom it may concern.’ ”</p>

<p>Hanslet produced a sheet of paper, covered with
writing which the Professor recognized as being the same as
that of the letter which Ludgrove had sent him. He
beckoned to Harold, who had been listening from the further
end of the room. “Read that to me, my boy,” he said.</p>

<p>Harold took the paper and opened it. It contained no
heading, but started abruptly.</p>

<blockquote><div>

  <p>“I, known now as Elmer Ludgrove, and practising as a
  herbalist in Praed Street, am in reality Ernest Morlandson,
  late a Doctor of Medicine, found guilty in the year 1906 of
  murdering Lord Whatley by the administration of an
  overdose of morphia. This statement can be verified by an
  examination of my finger-prints, and by a comparison of certain
  marks upon my body with Dr. Morlandson’s record, in the
  possession of the prison authorities.</p>

  <p>“I was found guilty, by a jury of men incapable of appreciating
  my motives, of wilful murder. My defence is that put
  forward at the time of my trial, that I believe, and do still
  believe, that my action was one of mercy rather than crime. As
  to the motives imputed to me, I affirm that, until shortly
  before my trial, I had no knowledge that my name had any
  place in Lord Whatley’s will.</p>

  <p>“I have spent fourteen years in a convict prison, and have seen
  all that I loved and honoured languish and die, my beloved
  wife, my professional status, my good name. I have descended
  to the uttermost depths, I have drunk the cup of bitterness of
  its dregs. The iron has entered into my soul. I was condemned
  to death for an act of mercy; I have lived for an act of justice.</p>

  <p>“Justice has no quarrel with those who prosecuted me. They
  did their duty. Nor is her sword pointed against the judge
  who sentenced me, or the prison authorities who held me in
  durance. They too but did their duty. It is upon those who
  condemned me, who, ignorant and careless, disregarded justice as a
  thing of no account, that the sword of justice has been turned.
  I have been her swordbearer.</p>

  <p>“Prison has been to me a hard and bitter school, a grinding
  University of crime. Here I have learnt the thousand devices
  by which men deceive their neighbours, the change of appearance,
  of voice, of character; the discarding of one personality
  and the assumption of another. I left prison fully prepared
  to execute the design which I had formed during the long
  horror of seclusion.</p>

  <p>“As Dr. Morlandson, I lived in seclusion upon my release.
  My plans were made; I had leisure and means in which to carry
  them out. Dr. Morlandson must die, and another must take his
  place. I sold most of my former possessions, and carried to my
  retreat only the few things I still required. Among these was a
  skeleton, which I had acquired many years before. I built my
  laboratory, and filled it with highly combustible substances. And
  meanwhile I experimented with new and hitherto unheard-of
  drugs.</p>

  <p>“When I was ready, I staged my own death. I entered my
  laboratory, locked the door on the inside, and arranged the
  skeleton in such a way that it would become a mere charred
  collection of bones, but would not be utterly consumed. With
  it I placed all the incombustible means of identification that
  I could find, chief among them a gold ring. Then, having lit
  a fuse, and placed my combustibles round it, I made my escape
  by a ladder through the skylights of the laboratory. I should
  add that I had collected a quantity of meat from the butcher and
  placed it where the fire would reach it. The smell of burning
  flesh was a useful element of suggestion.</p>

  <p>“My plan succeeded. Dr. Morlandson died and was buried. I
  retired to a hiding-place which I had prepared and provisioned,
  a disused clay-working 846 yards South 23 degrees East
  (true) from my laboratory. My hair had turned white during
  my imprisonment. I had only to allow my beard to grow, and I
  became the venerable herbalist, Elmer Ludgrove, seeking
  premises in which to practise his trade.</p>

  <p>“By the time that the contents of this letter become public,
  the justice of which I shall have been the instrument will be
  accomplished. This is my last will and testament, given before
  my appearance at the Court of the Eternal Judge, Who has
  greater mercy than any earthly jury. The remains of my fortune
  are contained, in the form of Bank of England notes to the value
  of fifteen thousand pounds, in a tin box deposited in the
  clay-workings whose position I have already indicated.</p>

  <p>“I have wielded unsparingly the sword of justice. But true
  justice makes amends to the innocent at the same time as it
  punishes the guilty. I therefore bequeath all my possessions
  to the relatives of those who have fallen by my hand, to be
  apportioned in such shares as the Public Trustee, whom I
  hereby appoint as my trustee, shall decide.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>“The work of a madman,” commented Hanslet, as
Harold finished his reading.</p>

<p>“A madman? I wonder,” replied the Professor slowly.
“If a man who gets a fixed idea into his head, and pursues
it through every difficulty, is a madman, then I agree.
But in that case some of the greatest names in history
must be convicted of madness. I believe that Morlandson
really believed that he was executing justice. Perhaps he
was. Is that document valid, Inspector?”</p>

<p>“I suppose so,” replied Hanslet. “It is signed, and
witnessed. The signature is ‘Ernest Morlandson,’ and below
that ‘Elmer Ludgrove.’ The witnesses’ signatures are
opposite the latter, and the paper has been folded, so that
the witnesses could see nothing but the Ludgrove
signature.”</p>

<p>“And who are the witnesses?” asked the Professor.</p>

<p>Hanslet smiled. “One of them is Elizabeth Cooper, his
charwoman. The other is Samuel Copperdock; the
document is dated a week before that unfortunate man’s
death. I think you will agree that this last touch was
typical of the methods of the Black Sailor.”</p>

<hr/>

<p>A few weeks later, when the Professor had sufficiently
recovered to resume his normal occupations, Mary the
parlourmaid announced to him that a lady and gentleman
wished to see him on business.</p>

<p>They proved to be Ted and Ivy, very shy, and
apparently wholly unable to express the object of their visit.
At last, by strenuous efforts, the Professor and Harold
between them got Ted to the point.</p>

<p>“It’s like this, sir,” he said. “You know all about that
will of Mr. Lud——, Dr. Morlandson’s, I should say,
sir.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know all about it,” replied the Professor. “I
must congratulate you upon receiving some compensation
at least for that man’s crimes.”</p>

<p>“I’m sure it’s very good of you, sir,” said Ted,
obviously ill at ease. “We were wondering—that is, Miss
Tovey and myself, sir, seeing that we’re not so to speak
familiar with these lawyer folk—if you’d be so good as to
help us, sir.”</p>

<p>“Help you? Of course I will help you to the best of
my ability,” replied the Professor heartily. “What is it
that you want me to do for you?”</p>

<p>The direct question was too much for Ted, who flushed
scarlet and stammered feebly. It was Ivy who stepped
into the breach.</p>

<p>“We want to arrange that our shares should be put
together in one lump, Dr. Priestley,” she said. “We don’t
either of us quite know how to ask about it. I think it
could be managed, don’t you?”</p>

<p>The Professor’s eyes twinkled. “I feel sure it could,”
he replied. “That is, of course, if there were a sufficiently
good reason for such a procedure.”</p>

<p>Ivy suddenly became intensely interested in the pattern
of the carpet. “There is a—a very good reason,” she said,
in a voice hardly above a whisper.</p>

<p>The Professor glanced from one to the other and
smiled with the smile of an old man who has not yet lost
his sympathy with the dreams of youth.</p>

<p>“Will you tell me the reason, Miss Tovey?” he asked.</p>

<p>“We’re going to get married,” replied Ivy, blushing
prettily.</p>

<p class="finis">The End</p>

</div>