<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: The Poisoned Pipe-Stem</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Poisoned Pipe-Stem</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove returned from Suffolk by a late train on Sunday night, burdened with a capacious suitcase, which he laid on the bench in the inner room. He made himself a cup of cocoa, and then proceeded leisurely to unpack the case.</p>
			<p>It contained a carefully arranged mass of plants, which he laid out in rows, attaching to each a label upon which he scribbled its name. He was thus busily engaged, when he was interrupted by a loud knocking upon the door of the shop, which he had locked behind him.</p>
			<p>The herbalist was not a man who allowed himself to be disturbed by trifles. He merely smiled and glanced at his plants, not a half of which were yet properly classified. Then he went towards the door. It had sometimes happened that one of his clients, in urgent need of his services, had hammered on the door during the hours when the shop was shut. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, if he happened to be within, made a point of answering these summonses. At any hour he was prepared to do what he could to relieve pain or anxiety.</p>
			<p>The door opened, disclosing a short, stout figure upon the step. The rather austere lines of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove’s face widened into a smile of hospitable welcome.</p>
			<p>“Come in, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock!” he exclaimed. “I haven’t been back more than a few minutes, but there’s a fire in the back room.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock nodded. “Thanks, Ludgrove,” he said, as he came in. “I know you’re just back, I saw you come in. And I thought to myself that this was a very good chance of having a few minutes’ chat with you.”</p>
			<p>“I’m only too glad you came over,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, leading the way to the back room. “Bring that chair up closer to the fire. I’ve just made myself a cup of cocoa. Will you have one, too? the kettle’s still boiling.”</p>
			<p>“Not for me, thank you kindly all the same,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “Cocoa’s not exactly in my line. A man of my age can’t afford to put on weight, you know.”</p>
			<p>His eyes strayed towards a cupboard in the corner of the room, the door of which his host had already opened. From it appeared a bottle of whiskey and a siphon, which were placed on the table within reach of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock’s hand. At a gesture from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, the tobacconist poured himself out a drink and held it to his lips. It was noticeable that his hand trembled slightly as he did so.</p>
			<p>For a minute or so <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock sat silently in his chair, glancing nervously about the room. It was obvious that he had something on his mind, but could not find the words in which to unburden himself. His host, skilled in the art of encouraging the tongue-tied, appeared not to notice his confusion, and strolled over towards the bench upon which his harvest was laid out.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock’s eyes followed him. “Hullo, did you bring that lot back with you this time?” he enquired in a tone which he endeavoured to render conversational.</p>
			<p>“Yes, they’re rather a good collection,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “There are one or two quite scarce plants among them, of which I have been anxious to secure specimens for a long time. I had a most enjoyable time. You ought to have come with me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock.”</p>
			<p>“I wish I had, I’d have been saved a deal of worry,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock fervently. Then, with scarcely a pause, he added, “Do you know old Ben Colburn?”</p>
			<p>“The baker at the other end of the street?” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “I always buy my bread at his shop, but I hardly know Ben Colburn himself, I have seen his son Dick several times. Isn’t Dick a friend of your lad’s?”</p>
			<p>For an instant <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock made no reply. His face grew even redder than usual, and he picked with his fingers at the arms of his chair. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, recognising the symptoms, knew that at last he was approaching the point of this late visit. He walked across the room, sat down in the chair on the opposite side of the fire, and waited.</p>
			<p>“Old Ben Colburn’s dead,” blurted out the tobacconist at last, as though the words had been torn from his lips.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove raised his eyebrows, “Indeed?” he murmured. “Rather a sudden end, surely? I was in the shop on Friday, talking to Dick, and he said nothing of his father being ill.”</p>
			<p>“No, he wouldn’t,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock grimly, “He wasn’t taken ill until about two o’clock yesterday afternoon, and he was dead by teatime.”</p>
			<p>“The usual story in such cases, I suppose?” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “A diseased heart, and a sudden attack ending fatally?”</p>
			<p>“Worse than that,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock slowly. Then suddenly he raised his eyes and looked fixedly at his host. “What do you know about young Dick?” he asked.</p>
			<p>It was the herbalist’s turn to hesitate, “I might reply that I am a customer of his,” he said at last. “It would be the truth, but not the whole truth. To you, I do not mind admitting in the strictest confidence that he has several times come to me for advice. You will forgive me if I am unable to tell you anything further.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock nodded. It was well known that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove had never divulged even a hint of the curious stories which had been told him in hesitating whispers in the privacy of this very room. It was the certain knowledge that this was so which gave so many of his clients the courage to confess to him their most secret troubles.</p>
			<p>“Well, put it this way,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “You know that young Dick and his father didn’t hit it off quite, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>“I may as well confess to that knowledge, since neither of them have made any secret of the fact,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove.</p>
			<p>“Old Ben was a bit of a character in his way,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “He used to drop in sometimes at the Cambridge Arms, and I got to know him quite well, in an offhand sort of way. He had the idea that he was the only man in London who could bake bread, and he often used to tell me that he spent all day and half the night in the bakehouse. He said it was the finest one of its size anywhere, and he used to take me round and look at it sometimes. I couldn’t see anything wonderful about it, but that don’t matter. Ever been there yourself?”</p>
			<p>“Never into the bakehouse. I have been into the shop at least twice a week for the last four years,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove.</p>
			<p>“Well, the bakehouse is away behind, you go up a long passage from the shop to get to it. Old Ben spent most of his time in the bakehouse, leaving the shop to the lad. But he was a suspicious old cove, and he always had it in his mind that Dick was trying to make a bit out of the business. Couldn’t blame him if he had, the old man kept him short enough. But Dick hadn’t much chance. There’s a cash register in the shop, through which every penny of the takings has to pass.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove nodded. “I know, I’ve often noticed it,” he agreed.</p>
			<p>“Every afternoon between two and three, when he’d had his dinner, old Ben used to come into the shop and sit at the cash register, checking the takings. And he always smoked a pipe while he was doing it. Queer thing he never smoked in the bakehouse, only just this one pipe in the day. He would smoke it through, then refill it and put it on a shelf in the corner of the shop, ready for the next day. I suppose he done the same thing every day for a dozen years or more. Now, you remember that Friday was poor Jim Tovey’s funeral?”</p>
			<p>“I do,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “You remember that I came in to see you that same evening.”</p>
			<p>“So you did. Well, while I was out, Old Ben comes round to my place to buy a pipe. He only kept one going at a time, and when the old one cracked he bought a new one. Always came to me for them, he did. Ted sold him one of the kind he always has, and out he goes.</p>
			<p>“Mind you, this is what Ted tells me. The rest of the story, Ted told me last night, after I got back from the Cambridge Arms. Seems young Dick had been in when I was over there and told him all about it. Old Ben goes back to his place, fills his new pipe, and puts it on the shelf ready for his usual smoke on Saturday afternoon. Dick swears nobody touched it in the meantime. The old man was very fussy about his pipe, and it was always left alone.</p>
			<p>“On Saturday, yesterday, that is, Ben comes back from his dinner a little after two, and the first thing he does is to pick up his pipe and light it. All at once he takes it out of his mouth and cusses. Dick asks him what’s the matter, and he says that the mouthpiece is rough and that he’s scratched his tongue on it. They have a look at the pipe together, and the old man finds a tiny splinter of glass stuck to the mouthpiece. He scrapes it off with a knife, lights his pipe again, and Dick goes out to get his dinner, same as he always does when the old man comes into the shop.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock paused, and the herbalist, who had been listening attentively, took the opportunity of putting in a question. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Colburn has been dead some little time, I believe?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, ten years or more, if my memory serves me right. Dick and his father lived over the shop, with a charwoman to come in and do for them in the morning. When Dick comes back from his dinner, a little before three, the old man was still sitting at the cash register, and Dick sees at once that something is wrong. The old chap can hardly speak, says his tongue’s very swollen, and that he feels stiff all over. Dick slips out sharp and gets a doctor, and between them they gets Ben upstairs to bed. Doctor, he did what he could, but it wasn’t any use, and poor old Ben dies in two or three hours.”</p>
			<p>“What an extraordinary thing!” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove.</p>
			<p>“That’s what the doctor said. He wanted to find the bit of glass which had scratched old Ben’s tongue, and he and Dick had a hunt for it, but it must have fallen on the floor of the shop. It was only a tiny piece, anyway. Of course they never found it, but the doctor says there must have been some extraordinary powerful poison on it, and I can’t see how a bit of glass like that could get stuck on the mouthpiece of a pipe accidental like.”</p>
			<p>“Of course, nicotine acts as a poison if it is injected into the blood,” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “It is just possible that the fragment of glass was harmless enough, but that the nicotine in the pipe found its way into the scratch.” But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock shook his head. “It was a new pipe, what hadn’t ever been smoked before,” he replied. “Bought at my place the day before, as I told you.”</p>
			<p>“Did your son examine the pipe before he gave it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove quickly.</p>
			<p>“That’s just what I asked him, and he says he can’t be sure. Of course, he didn’t see any glass or he’d have given old Ben another pipe. We gets them in dozens, each pipe twisted up in a bit of paper. Ted took the first that came out of the box, tore the paper off it, and handed it to Ben, who put it straight into his pocket. I’ve looked at the rest of the box since, and there’s no sign of any glass on any of them.”</p>
			<p>“You say that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn filled the pipe as soon as he got home, and put it in the usual place,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove slowly. “It was lying there until two o’clock on Saturday. Anybody might have tampered with it in the meanwhile. The cash register, and I suppose the shelf where the pipe was kept, is within easy reach of anybody coming into the shop.”</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid that won’t work,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock, shaking his head. “There’s not one in a thousand as goes into the shop that know’s the pipe’s there. You didn’t yourself till I told you just now, yet you say you’re a regular customer. No, if that pipe was tampered with, it was somebody on the other side of the counter what did it.”</p>
			<p>“Then you are quite convinced in your own mind that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn was deliberately murdered?” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “But what motive could anybody have for desiring his death?”</p>
			<p>“What motive had anybody for murdering poor old Jim Tovey last week?” retorted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “There’s only one person who gains anything by Ben’s death, and who that is you know as well as I do!”</p>
			<p>“I can’t help thinking that you are taking too grave a view of the case,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “I admit that it is difficult to account for a piece of poisoned glass finding its way on to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn’s pipe by accident, but murder is a very grave charge, and there is hardly sufficient evidence at the moment to warrant it.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock braced himself in his chair as though to give himself the strength to utter his next words. “Ludgrove,” he said impressively. “I <em>know</em> poor Ben Colburn was murdered, same as I know Jim Tovey was murdered. And it was the same hand as struck them both down.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove sank slowly back into his chair, and a faint smile twinkled for a moment at the corner of his lips. But before he could make any remark, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock, who had been watching him closely, continued.</p>
			<p>“It’s all very well for you to laugh, but neither you nor any other living soul knows what I do. Now just you listen, and see if I’m not right. Last Wednesday, I was in the Cambridge Arms in the evening, same as I almost always am. In comes old Ben Colburn, and comes straight over to me. He puts his hand in his pocket, and slaps an ordinary bone counter down on the table in front of me. ‘Now then, Sam, what’s the meaning of this little joke?’ he says.</p>
			<p>“I looks at the counter and I looks at him. ‘What do you mean, what’s the joke?’ I says.</p>
			<p>“Why, didn’t you send me this?” he says, suspicious like.</p>
			<p>“I told him I hadn’t, and then he says that it came to him by post that morning, wrapped up in a bit of blank paper. ‘I made sure it was one of your jokes, Sam,’ he says. I picked up the counter and looked at it. On one side it had the figure <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> drawn on it in red ink. ‘What does it mean?’ I said. ‘That’s just what I want to know,’ says Ben. ‘You shove it in your pocket, Sam, you’re better at finding out that sort of thing than I am.’ So I shoved it in my pocket, and here it is.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove took the counter which the tobacconist handed him and looked at it curiously. It was just as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock had described it, a white bone counter, about the size of a halfpenny, with the Roman numeral <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, carefully traced upon it in red ink.</p>
			<p>“I never thought about it again, until this afternoon,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “Naturally I didn’t connect it with Ben’s death. Why should I? But today, being Sunday, I went round to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tovey neighbour-like. You see, it was her first Sunday after Jim’s death, and I thought that she and Ivy might get brooding over things.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock looked anxiously at his friend as he spoke, but the expression on the herbalist’s face was one of polite interest only. “Very thoughtful of you, I’m sure,” he murmured. “I hope that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tovey is not taking her husband’s death too much to heart.”</p>
			<p>“She’s bearing up as well as can be expected,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “She and I got to talking about Jim, and wondering whoever it could have been that murdered him. She was telling me all about the telephone call, and she went on to say that this was the second queer thing that happened just before he died. Naturally I asked her what the first was, and she told me that on the Friday morning before his death, a typewritten envelope came addressed to him. He opened it, and all there was inside was a white counter with the number I drawn on it in red ink. Now what do you make of that?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove sat silent for a moment under his friend’s triumphant gaze, a thoughtful frown upon his face. “This is most extraordinary,” he said at last. “If your facts are correct⁠—not that I doubt them for a moment, but I know how fatally easy it is to find presages after the event⁠—it means that both <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tovey and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn received, a couple of days or so before their respective deaths, a white counter bearing a numeral in red ink. It is almost certain that both counters were sent by the same person, and, if they were intended as a warning, we may infer, as you said, that both men were murdered by the same hand.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock nodded rather impatiently. “Just what I told you, all along,” he said.</p>
			<p>“But, my dear sir, look at the difficulties which that theory entails,” objected <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “We are agreed that it is impossible to think of any motive for the murder of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tovey, and I at least am inclined to say the same regarding the murder of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn. Yet now we are faced with the problem of finding a man who had a motive for murdering both of them. By the way, do you happen to know if they were ever associated in any way?”</p>
			<p>“Never!” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock emphatically. “Although they’d both lived in these parts most of their lives, I don’t suppose they even knew one another by sight.”</p>
			<p>“The fact that they had nothing in common makes it all the more puzzling,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove reflectively. “But perhaps you have thought of a way out of the difficulty?”</p>
			<p>A cloud came over <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock’s naturally cheerful face, and there was a marked hesitancy in his tone as he replied. “Aye, I have thought of something, and it’s that that’s been worrying me. Mind, I don’t believe it myself, but I’m in mortal fear lest someone else should see it too.”</p>
			<p>“I think I can guess what you mean,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove gently. “I know as well as you do that it isn’t true, but we’re both of us too well aware of the mischief that can be caused by whispering tongues to treat it as unimportant. You mean that young Colburn was not on good terms with his father, that he and your son are great friends, and that your son sold <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn the pipe which is supposed to have been the agency of his death.”</p>
			<p>“I do mean that,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock deliberately. “I mean too that Ted is very sweet on Ivy Tovey, and that poor old Jim wasn’t very keen on the idea. Now you see the sort of lying whispers that might get about if all this was known. And I’m blest if I see what I can do about it.”</p>
			<p>“I think you told me that you had some conversation with a Police Inspector last week on the subject of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tovey’s murder?” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove.</p>
			<p>“That’s right,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. “Very decent sort of chap he was, too. What about him?”</p>
			<p>“Do you know where and how to get hold of him?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, he left me his card. I’ve got it at home somewhere.”</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock, if you will take my advice you will go and see him, and tell him everything you know, as you have just told me. It’s all bound to come out, sooner or later, and if you have already informed the police, your position will be all the stronger. Don’t you agree?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose I do,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock reluctantly. “But it seems terrible, like giving evidence against my own flesh and blood.”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary, you will be doing the very best for your son. A frank statement of facts is always the best defence of the innocent. Tell your friend the Inspector everything, not forgetting the curious incident of the numbered discs. He will know better than I do what advice to give you in the matter. And, if you feel that I can be of the slightest assistance to you, do not hesitate to come to me at once.”</p>
			<p>After some further discussion <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock agreed to follow his friend’s advice, and, after a parting drink, went home, somewhat comforted. The herbalist, having locked the door behind him, returned to the interrupted classification of his plants. But, from the slight frown which passed across his face from time to time, one might have guessed that he was thinking more of his conversation with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock than of the specimens before him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
