<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Bone Counters</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, as Hanslet had said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Priestley, bore the shock of the finding of the numbered counter extremely well. He had refused to make any alteration in usual habits, and it was with the greatest difficulty that Whyland could persuade him to allow a constable to sleep in the house at night.</p>
			<p>“I can assure you that this mysterious warning does not terrify me,” he had said. “I am an old man, and death cannot be far off in any case. I am not sure that I should not prefer a violent end to some lingering illness which might leave me helpless for months before it killed me. But, if you think that by keeping a close watch over me you can gain some clue to the distributor of these counters, by all means do so.”</p>
			<p>He was in this frame of mind when Hanslet came to see him on the Sunday afternoon. Whyland brought him round and introduced him, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove welcomed him with his usual courtesy.</p>
			<p>“I have heard of you, Inspector Hanslet, and I am indeed proud to make your acquaintance. Sit down, and make yourself comfortable.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove,” Hanslet replied. “I thought you wouldn’t mind my coming to have a chat with you. Whyland here has told me all about these queer happenings in this street of yours, and of the help which you have been to him.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid that I have been of very little help,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove with a smile. “Inspector Whyland has been kind enough to appreciate beyond their value any suggestions I have made.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s as may be,” replied Hanslet. “Now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, I am going to ask for further assistance on your part. You know as much about these counters as I do. They seem to have been sent, so far, to six men, all of whom have died shortly after they received them. Whyland tells me that he has utterly failed to establish any connection between these men. Except for the fact that Tovey and Copperdock were close friends, they all seem to be comparative strangers to one another, and have never been associated in any common enterprise. You see what I mean, of course?”</p>
			<p>“I do, indeed. In fact, Inspector Whyland and I discussed the point, long ago. It might be possible to imagine a motive for the murder of a group of men who were inspired by a common motive or who belonged to some common society. The difficulty is, assuming that the agency which compassed their deaths was the same in each case, to imagine a motive for the actions of that agency.”</p>
			<p>“Exactly!” exclaimed Hanslet warmly. “I see that you appreciate my point as clearly as I do myself. But now we have a fresh line of investigation. You yourself are added to the list of those who have received the counter. Can you explain why you should have been singled out?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove shook his head. “As you may suppose, the subject has occupied my thoughts ever since I found the counter,” he replied. “I am an old man, as I have said before, and for the last twenty years or more I have led a retired life, retired, I mean, in the sense that I have taken no part in the affairs of the world. I have had enemies as well as friends; few men who have reached my years could say otherwise. But most of the contemporaries of my youth are dead, and in any case I do not believe that any of the enemies I may have made would be so vindictive as to seek my life.”</p>
			<p>“Let us look at it another way, then,” said Hanslet. “Can you imagine any way in which you, in common with the six men who have already died, could have made an unconscious enemy?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “Of those six men, I knew only two personally, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock fairly well, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Colburn slightly. Both of these I have known only since I came to live in Praed Street, five years ago. Tovey, I had heard Copperdock speak of. The name of Richard Pargent, I had seen mentioned in the newspapers. The other two were complete strangers to me. I cannot imagine how we could have committed any act in common which would draw down upon us the vengeance of a single assassin.”</p>
			<p>“Then you do not believe that these deaths are the work of a single assassin, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove?” enquired Hanslet with interest.</p>
			<p>“Not of a single man, acting upon any rational motive,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “Even in the brain of a homicidal maniac there is usually traceable some dim guiding principle. He either conceives a hatred for a certain class of person, or he kills indiscriminately, usually selecting the people nearest to hand. In this case the selection was anything, but indiscriminate. Mind, I am assuming for the moment, as apparently you are yourself, that the death of all six was the direct sequel of their receipt of a numbered counter. If you adopt the theory that a single man is responsible, you may as well believe in the existence of the black sailor.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid that we are already committed to him,” said Hanslet with a smile. “You see, we offered a reward for him, and it would never do for the police to admit that they had offered a reward for a ghost. Whyland, what is your honest opinion of this black sailor?”</p>
			<p>“Entirely between ourselves and this most comfortable room, I have never believed in his existence for a moment,” replied Whyland readily. “But what could I do? That young rip, Wal Snyder, swore to having seen him, and I couldn’t shake him.”</p>
			<p>“Whether young Snyder saw him or not,” remarked the herbalist, “your reward has made him a very real person to the poorer classes of this district. One or other of my customers sees him every night, usually during the hour which immediately follows the closing of the public houses. And, as a rule, they come here hotfoot to tell me about it.”</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove,” laughed Whyland. “I wouldn’t have done it if I could have helped it. By the way, I suppose that you are perfectly satisfied that none of these odd customers of yours know anything about this business?”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “They are a strange lot, I admit, professing a code of morals which in some respects would shock the conscience of a savage, and many of them are not above any petty dishonesty. But murder, deliberate and planned murder, that is, is outside their imagination. Besides, the way they know one another’s most secret actions is almost uncanny. If one of them knew anything about these deaths, they would all know within a very short time, and the secret would be a secret no longer. Of course, they all come to me with long and complicated tales of how they could tell me the name of the man who did it, if I will give them the money in advance. But I am well accustomed to that, it is a symptom which follows every crime committed in this district.”</p>
			<p>“You’re quite right, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, I know something of the ways of these people,” said Hanslet. “When they talk like that, you may be sure that they know nothing. It’s when they avoid the subject that you may learn something. Well, I’m very glad to have met you. There’s just one thing I should like to say. You have received this counter, which was evidently slipped in here while all of you were thinking of nothing but the death of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock. You, and those whose business it is to guard you, are therefore forewarned. As long as you do what we ask you to, I do not believe that you are in any danger.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove smiled. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Copperdock was also guarded and forewarned,” he said quietly.</p>
			<p>Whyland swore softly. “I believe Copperdock committed suicide out of sheer funk,” he said. “Anyhow, I can’t see any way in which he can possibly have been murdered.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I shall not commit suicide just yet, I promise you that,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove.</p>
			<p>It was not more than five minutes after the departure of Hanslet and Whyland that the herbalist heard a soft knock upon the door of the shop. He went to open it, and found Ted and Ivy standing on the step, closely scrutinized by the man in plain clothes who had been deputed to look after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove’s safety.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove glanced at Ivy, and welcomed Ted warmly. “Come in,” he said hospitably. “I was going to look in later and ask you if you would care to spend the evening here. I am very glad you came over.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove,” replied Ted awkwardly. “This is Miss Tovey. You have heard poor Dad and me mention her.”</p>
			<p>“I have indeed. I am very glad to meet you, Miss Tovey. I think that is the best chair. Won’t you sit down and make yourself comfortable?”</p>
			<p>The young people sat down in silence. It was evident that they had come with a purpose, but now they had arrived they did not quite know how to state it. Curiously enough, it was Ivy who made the plunge.</p>
			<p>“I’ve heard so much about you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, that I felt that Ted and I simply must come and ask your advice,” she began. “We both feel we must do something. First of all my father is murdered, and now Ted’s. We just can’t sit still and wait any longer. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, can’t something be done to punish the man?”</p>
			<p>The herbalist looked at her gravely. “My dear young lady, I sympathize with you entirely,” he said. “I, too, have felt the desire to do something in the face of these extraordinary happenings. But let me assure you that the very best brains in the police are at work in the matter. Inspector Hanslet, who was here just now, has the matter in hand, and he has unravelled almost as tangled skeins as this appears to be.”</p>
			<p>“That was Inspector Hanslet, was it?” enquired Ted, with interest. “We saw two men, one of whom we knew was Inspector Whyland, come in to see you, and we waited until they went away. I’ve heard of Inspector Hanslet before, seen his name in the papers, often enough. I’m glad he’s on the job, I shall feel that something’s being done at last. The other chap always seemed to be hanging round the poor old Dad, and doing nothing.”</p>
			<p>“It is very difficult for the police to do anything without evidence,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove gravely. “Now, since you have come to ask my advice, I am going to take an old man’s liberty and ask you both a question which you may consider impertinent. Have either of you any knowledge, concerning your dead parents, which you have not imparted to the police? Or, perhaps, I should have put it another way. Have either of you any suspicions, which you have thought it better to keep to yourselves, as to the motive which anyone might have had for committing these murders?”</p>
			<p>He looked at Ivy as he spoke, but she shook her head emphatically. “I can think of nothing which I have not already told Inspector Whyland,” she replied. “Daddy was a dear, and I don’t believe he had an enemy in the world,” she replied. “He was a little hot-tempered at times, but everybody knew that he meant nothing by it.” She paused for a moment, then continued with downcast eyes. “I can imagine what may have passed through your mind, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, but Daddy wasn’t that sort of man. I won’t say that he was above a mild flirtation, but I am sure that no woman was the cause of his being murdered.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Miss Tovey,” replied the herbalist gravely. “That is a franker statement than I had any right to expect. And you, Ted?”</p>
			<p>“No, I’ve told the police everything,” replied Ted wearily. “I know they think that Dad committed suicide. I believe they want people to think so, so that there won’t be another undetected murder up against them. But I know he didn’t. Dad wasn’t the sort of man to do a thing like that. I know he got a bit tight sometimes, but why shouldn’t he? It never did him or anybody else any harm. But even when he was tight he never got morbid, like some fellows do. Besides, he never used one of them syringe things. I don’t suppose he’d ever seen one in his life, and he wouldn’t know how to use it. No, Dad was murdered, right enough, though I’m blest if I can see how it was done.”</p>
			<p>“Can’t you help us, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove?” broke in Ivy. “Surely there must be some way of finding out who killed Daddy and Ted’s father. It must have been some lunatic, for no sane person could possibly have a grudge against either of them.”</p>
			<p>“The only way to find out seems to be to learn something about these counters,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “Your father, I am told, received the first. Did you see it, Miss Tovey?”</p>
			<p>“No. I only know what mother told me,” replied Ivy. “Daddy was a bit late coming back from Covent Garden that morning, and I had finished my breakfast and gone to work before he came in. Of course, he had no idea what it meant, poor dear. He thought it was one of these advertising dodges, and threw it into the fire, envelope and all.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that is a pity,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “The police have seen all the others, and they say that they are all exactly similar, and that the numbers seem to have been written on them with the same pen and ink, just an ordinary steel pen and red ink that one can buy at any stationer’s. And, whenever they have been sent by post, the envelopes have been of the same sort, the address typed with the same machine, a Planet, and posted in this district, London, W.2. This looks as though they had been sent out by the same hand.”</p>
			<p>“Typed on a Planet, were they?” remarked Ted. “That’s the same machine as we’ve got.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is a fairly popular make, I am told,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “But I have never used a typewriter in my life, and know very little about them. No doubt Miss Tovey can tell us if Planet machines are used extensively?”</p>
			<p>“I had never used one until Ted asked me to teach him to use his, nearly a year ago now,” replied Ivy. “There were none at the school I was at, and we haven’t any at the office. But I believe that some firms have several of them. They have not been sold in England for very long.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Miss Tovey,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “Now there is another curious thing which I should like to mention. One day, when I was in your place, talking to your father, I saw you sending out what I took to be accounts, Ted. Was I right?”</p>
			<p>“I expect so,” said Ted, readily. “I always look after that side of the business.”</p>
			<p>“Would you mind running across and getting me one of the envelopes that you use?”</p>
			<p>“Of course.” Ted left the room, and returned within a couple of minutes, holding an envelope which he handed to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “Those are what we always use,” he said. “We’ve had them for nearly two years now.”</p>
			<p>“Do you know where they came from?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, examining the envelope with great interest.</p>
			<p>“Dad bought a large quantity of them, ten thousand, I believe, from a wholesale stationer somewhere in the Harrow Road,” replied Ted. “I forget the name of the people. They were going out of business, or something, and were selling the stuff off cheap. Dad had an idea of sending out a lot of circulars, and thought these would do to send them in. But the scheme fell through, and I’ve been using them for ordinary business purposes ever since.”</p>
			<p>“I see,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove thoughtfully. “Now, it is a very extraordinary thing that the envelopes which have been shown me as having contained these numbered counters, are exactly the same in every respect as this that you have just given me.”</p>
			<p>This remark was received in horrified silence. It was Ivy who broke it. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove!” she exclaimed. “You don’t mean⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I mean nothing,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove swiftly. “I am trying to make you both see one aspect of this matter which has caused me much anxiety for some time. The counters were marked with a pen and ink exactly similar to those you have in your office, Ted. The envelopes in which they were sent are exactly the same as the ones you possess and have used for many years. The addresses were typed with a Planet machine, which, according to Miss Tovey, are not to be found in every office. Finally, the letters were posted in this district, W.2. You cannot fail to see the inference which must infallibly be drawn.”</p>
			<p>“But, good heavens, the idea’s absurd!” broke in Ted. “You mean that the counters were sent out from our place!” He laughed mirthlessly, while Ivy stared at the grave face of the old herbalist, only half comprehending.</p>
			<p>“You, Ted, have seen at least one of these counters,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, in a quiet and solemn voice. “Do you remember ever seeing anything like it before?”</p>
			<p>Ted stared at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove, and the incredulous expression of his face turned slowly to one of mingled amazement and horror. “Why, yes,” he stammered. “Dad had a box of white bone counters just like the one I saw. He used to ask his friends in to play some card game, in which these counters were used. I haven’t seen them for a couple of years or more.”</p>
			<p>Again there was a silence, broken by something that sounded like a sob from Ivy. Ted turned towards her with a despairing gesture. “It isn’t true!” he exclaimed. “I can’t explain it, but it isn’t true! Dad couldn’t have done it. Why should he? There’s some terrible mystery behind all this. I shall never believe that poor dad had anything to do with it. Why was he killed himself, if he had?”</p>
			<p>He turned appealingly to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove. “You don’t believe it yourself, do you?” he said.</p>
			<p>“Your father was my friend, and I should be the last to accuse him,” he replied. “But, in fairness to you both, I was bound to point out the direction in which any enquiry as to the counters must lead. I do not profess to understand it, but I must warn you that a man like Inspector Hanslet cannot fail to perceive the points I have mentioned.”</p>
			<p>“But what am I to do if he questions me?” asked Ted distractedly.</p>
			<p>“Tell the truth,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ludgrove solemnly. “Hide nothing, for if it is discovered that you have concealed anything, it will tell all the more heavily against your father. There is only one true court of justice, the court of our own hearts. A consciousness of innocence is the only support against an unjust accusation. It would perhaps have been better had your father realized this.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
